Corporate Responsibility
and Sustainability
Update 2015/2016

1

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Christine Hodgson
Chairman of Capgemini UK
Co-Chair Group CR&S Board

During 2015, the UN launched the new Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), which provide a framework for action to address
global social, environmental and economic challenges. These
goals were created under greater consultation with business, (in
contrast to the outgoing Millennium Development Goals) and as
such place a greater emphasis on business to contribute to
achieving the goals.
Likewise, the agreement made between the world’s leaders at
the 21st Conference of the Parties (COP21) in Paris, to take
mitigating action preventing global temperature rises above 2
degrees Celsius (beyond pre-industrial temperatures), requires
significant collaboration between business, government, policy
makers and society.
There are important implications for business in terms of
operational practices and potential organizational changes
required to support these global aims and expectations. The
importance of corporate responsibility, of risk management and
of mitigation against the impacts of climate change, is expected
to continue to rise with a greater awareness amongst
stakeholders (clients, employees, investors and shareholders).
In addition to our own duty to be an efficient and responsible
company, as an innovative and transformative organization,
Capgemini is well placed to offer new technology solutions for
a low carbon economy.
Within Capgemini, 2015 saw continued progression of the
Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability agenda. We
established a Group CR&S Board under the co-chair of Hubert
Giraud (Group Management Board Member) and myself
strengthening governance across the Group. The Board
members were selected to reflect the diversity of the
organization and include a range of senior executives providing
wide representation across the Group. The CR&S Board is
responsible for reviewing, debating and ultimately approving
CR&S strategy, policies and practices for the Group.

2

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

Throughout 2015, we continued to enhance our capability
concerning environmental management including the
establishment of a Center of Excellence in India.
This capability enables us to provide consistent and efficient
environmental support across the Group including a streamlined
approach to ISO 14001 certification. This approach assisted in
the achievement of the latest certifications across Capgemini
North America and Capgemini Sweden, increasing the number
of countries with certification to 11.
During the summer of 2015, an internal group, comprising key
CR&S leaders and members of the Executive CR&S Board
developed a new global community strategy for the Group.
Encompassing a range of initiatives, the program aims to impact
positively the lives of one million people by 2020 through our global
Education and Skills programs and led to the largest engagement
of our people in any one Community initiative to date.
During 2015 Capgemini acquired IGATE, who, with their
established ICare community programme closely align with and
strengthen our CR&S focus particularly pertaining to education
and skills.
Capgemini continue to place great emphasis on our people.
Our values define how we behave both internally and in all
aspects of our business transactions. Our standards are high
with expectations to match. We have been named as one of the
World’s Most Ethical Companies by the Ethisphere Institute for
the fourth consecutive year.
This report provides an overview of our key achievements in our
Values & Ethics, Environmental Sustainability, Community
Engagement and People Culture programs. It also presents our
2015 carbon data which shows an overall decrease in emissions
associated with our global operations of 4% as compared to
2014. This data is presented in our Group Annual Financial report
in accordance with Grenelle II legislation (legislation: article
R.225-105-1 of the French Commercial Code).
Further information about our approach to Corporate
Responsibility and Sustainability can be found on our
website www.cagemini.com

Content
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY						2
1.	INTRODUCTION							4

	
1.1	
Our approach to CR&S						5
	
1.2	
Governance							6
	
1.3	
Materiality and Scope						6

2.	VALUES AND ETHICS						7

	
	
	
	

2.1	
2.2	
2.3	
2.4	

Ethics and Compliance Networks				
The Code of Business Ethics					
Specific Policies and Training	 	
	
	
	
Raising Concern Procedure 	 	
	
	
	

8
9
9
10

3.	ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY			11
	
3.1	
Group environmental policy					12
	 3.2	 Group environmental management approach	 	
	
12
	
3.3	
Environmental performance					14
	 3.4	 Key performance indicators and methodology	 	
	
16
4.	COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT				20
	
	
	

4.1	 Our global initiatives	 	
	
	
	
	
4.2	 Global Community Engagement Awards (GCEA)	
	
4.3	 Other national initiatives 					

22
24
26

5.	PEOPLE CULTURE 	

	
	
	

					28
5.1	 Diversity and inclusion (D&I)	
	
	
	
	
29
5.2	 Disability 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
32
5.3	 Learning & Development	
	
	
	
	
34

6.	SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT				36

	
	

6.1	 Purchasing Principles	 	
	
	
	
6.2	 Our Ethics & Sustainable procurement principles	

	
	

36
37

7.	 CLIENT SERVICES	
	
	
	
	

7.1	
7.2	
7.3	
7.4	

					38
Enabling client transformation	 	
	
	
	
39
U2ES Transformation	 	
	
	
	
	
39
Smart Energy Services	 	
	
	
	
	
40
Merlin data center	
	
	
	
	
	
40

Appendix A:	Environmental Performance Data	

	

	

41

Appendix B:	Community Investment and Donations	 	

	

44

Appendix C: Global Diversity & Inclusion Charter	

	

45

	

46

	

Appendix D: Commitments, Awards and Recognitions 	

3

1.	INTRODUCTION
As we have grown to become Europe’s largest IT services company, our commitment to
Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability (CR&S) has continued to mature and remains
underpinned by our Values and Ethics. Capgemini was founded in 1967 by Serge Kampf. His
vision and mission for the organization placed people at our heart, with a strong set of values
central to the way we do business. Capgemini prefers to work collaboratively, building working
partnerships with our clients in order to ensure class-leading services in over 40 countries. With
a head count of over 180,000 people, Capgemini recognizes the rich diversity of our people and
the resulting innovation and diversity of thought, through the provision of an inclusive working
environment.
As a provider of consultancy, technology and outsourcing services, together with professional
services through our Sogeti business, Capgemini Group’s CR&S program covers the reduction
of our environmental impacts, the contribution we make to the communities in which we
operate, as well as the creation of a diverse and inclusive work environment, to enable our
people to both develop and serve our clients. Our overall management approach also supports
all national laws and regulations, in particular the fundamental conventions on labor standards
of the International Labor Organization (ILO), the principles of the 1948 Universal Declaration of
Human Rights (where we refuse the use of forced and child labor), and the OECD guidelines for
Multinational Enterprises.
This report provides updates regarding our Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability (CR&S)
program through 2015, with the inclusion of our 2015 Group carbon data (covering 100% of our
headcount)(1) as audited externally in compliance with Grenelle II legislation. The use of the word
‘Group’ throughout this document denotes the organization in its entirety. Where narrative may
be specific to a country or number of countries, they are named.

(1)	 Made up of those countries who are formally reporting through a monthly or quarterly process and those
		 (around 2-3%) where operations are too small to warrant adherence to a formal process.

4

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

1.1	 Our approach to CR&S
The Capgemini Group CR&S program continues to focus on the three key areas of Environmental Sustainability,
Community Engagement and People Culture which are underpinned by our focus on Values & Ethics and our
commitment to work with our clients to deliver sustainable business services. The Group CR&S Board comprised of
senior executives from around the Group, continues to provide leadership and governance across these key areas.

VALUES & ETHICS:

“It is about who we are and the way we do business”.
Built on a foundation of our seven core values (Honesty, Boldness, Trust, Freedom, Team
Spirit/Solidarity, Modesty and Fun), our Code of Ethics supports our corporate culture and
permeates all our business practices, procurement behaviors and employee welfare
policies.

PEOPLE CULTURE:

“We are committed to being an employer of choice for people who wish to
develop in a creative and diverse environment”.
Our priority is to promote the professional development and well-being of our people by
ensuring that both our business practices and our facilities empower excellence. We have
a culture whereby we respect and value the diversity and creativity of all our people.

COMMUNITY COMMITMENT:

“We strive to have a positive impact on the communities in which we live
and work”.
As a major global employer, we work locally, nationally and internationally with local
authorities, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and charities on two priorities:
education and development. The Group encourages the active involvement of each of our
team members in our communities.

ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY:

“We are committed to understanding, measuring and reducing our
environmental impacts”.
We recognize that, the business services we provide have an impact on the environment.
We work hard to reduce this impact by saving energy and reducing waste, as well as by
reducing business travel. We also work to raise employee awareness of the critical issues
related to the environment.

CLIENT SERVICES:

“Our clients benefit from our understanding of the environment and our worldrenowned business transformation capabilities”.
We deliver long-lasting added-value with tangible results. We take time to talk to our clients
and ensure that their views are taken into account, and we look to embed CR&S
considerations into our service offerings.

5

1.2	Governance
With an enhanced focus on strategic planning and governance, 2015 was a pivotal year for our program across the key areas
identified within this report. January 2015 saw the inaugural meeting of the Group’s CR&S Board co-chaired by Hubert Giraud
(Group Management Board Member and Head of People Management & Transformation) and Christine Hodgson (Chairman,
Capgemini UK Plc). Throughout the year, the Group CR&S Board worked to advance Capgemini’s strategic approach, further
embedding CR&S principles into our business operations and practices.
The CR&S Board continues to maintain consistency and ensure the uniform implementation of our CR&S policies and initiatives
across our Group, led locally by our global network of CR&S professionals.
Leveraging the significant expertise of our CR&S professionals around the Group, multinational working groups continue to assist
in driving the program forward. These international networks include:
•	
•	
•	
•	

the
the
the
the

Ethics & Compliance Officers’ network, reporting to the Group Chief Ethics & Compliance Officer;
Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Leadership network, comprising CR&S professionals from within the Group;
global Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability network, open to all our people; and
global client-facing Sustainability network, focusing on embedding sustainability into client service offerings.

In addition, we have separate country level CR&S Boards in a number of our key geographies, such as Germany, India, the
Netherlands, and the UK; in others, such as France and North America, CR&S Issues are discussed at local Executive
Committee meetings.

Extract from the CR&S Board Charter
The Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability (CR&S) Board will provide the executive level governance for
CR&S within Capgemini. The CR&S Board will review, debate and ultimately approve CR&S policies and
practices for the Group.
For Capgemini, CR&S means taking a long term view – it is our approach to business that reduces our impact on
the environment, contributes to the communities in which we operate and ensures that we remain a diverse and
inclusive company. The Chair of the CR&S Board provides the linkage to Capgemini’s Group Management Board
(chaired by Capgemini’s Group CEO) ensuring the input of the CEO and the alignment of Capgemini’s approach to
CR&S with the Group overall business strategy.
The overall program continues to focus on the three key areas of Environmental Sustainability, Community
Engagement and People Culture. A number of interactive multi-national working groups continue to drive the
program forward under the direction of the Group Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Director.

1.3	 Materiality and Scope
In order to ensure our Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability program remains aligned with stakeholder expectations, an
analysis of the relative importance of sustainability aspects and issues was undertaken during 2014. This analysis, or materiality
assessment, is the result of a range of internal and external stakeholder interviews together with desk research.
During 2015 this view was not found to have altered with the potential exception of child labor, whereby it was queried by
a number of stakeholders what place this had on our materiality matrix. The matrix itself and further information regarding the
assessment can be found on our website at www.capgemini.com/about
This report focuses primarily on the CR&S activities of Capgemini Group (excluding IGATE) for the calendar year 2015.
This report includes environmental data for Capgemini and Sogeti, however, IGATE is not yet included.

6

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

2.	 VALUES AND ETHICS
Since the formation of Capgemini in 1967, our culture and business practices have been
inspired and guided by our seven core values: Honesty, Boldness, Trust, Freedom, Team
Spirit, Modesty and Fun. These values sit at the heart of our approach as an ethical and
responsible company and are the guiding principles by which we conduct our business
both individually and collectively. The rapid acceleration of technology and social media
enrich our business but also increase our exposure to reputational risk, making it
even more important that all our people understand their responsibility for maintaining
Capgemini’s ethics and values.

2015 Highlights:
We appointed a New Group Chief Ethics & Compliance
Officer to drive forward our strong commitment to
Values & Ethics;

We were named as one of the World’s Most
Ethical Companies by the Ethisphere Institute,
for the third consecutive year; and

We hosted six business ethics workshops
across the world for more than 100 managers
and top executives, on practical ways to deal
with ethics and compliance issues.

7

Our ability to build trust with clients, shareholders, team members and suppliers is critical to our ongoing success. Our current
Ethics & Compliance Program was launched in 2009 by the Group Board of Directors based on the ethics culture which has
been a core part of the Group since its creation. As part of this program, a network of Ethics and Compliance Officers was set
up, and a Code of Business Ethics, an Anti-Corruption Policy and a Competition Laws Policy were launched to reassert our
values in every country in which we operate. All of our people are expected to comply with the principles of these “three
fundamental documents”, and follow an e-learning training course on each one.
The Ethics & Compliance program demonstrates our Group’s deep-rooted values and strong ethical culture. It also contributes to
attracting, developing and retaining our talented people. Achieving commitment and creating an ethical environment strengthens
our reputation, helps us to win new business and allows us to take our place amongst the leaders in our industry.

HONESTY

BOLDNESS

TRUST

FREEDOM

TEAM SPIRIT

MODESTY

FUN

2.1	 Ethics and Compliance Networks
The managers of the Group and its operating units (SBUs/BUs) are accountable for driving the Ethics and Compliance program
in their respective units, in compliance with local laws, regulations and procedures.
The Chief Ethics & Compliance Officer (CECO) is responsible for the Ethics & Compliance program across the entire Group. The
Ethics & Compliance program and its achievements are reviewed annually by the Ethics Governance and Nomination Committee
of the Board of Directors.
Local General Counsels have also been appointed as Ethics & Compliance Officers (GC-ECO). They ensure implementation of
the Ethics & Compliance program within their geographic region and liaise with the CECO.

8

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

2.2	 The Code of
Business Ethics

2.3	 Specific Policies
and Training

In order to integrate our ethical culture across the entire
Group, the Code of Business Ethics, is now available in
14 languages. It receives the collective and individual support
of the members of the Board of Directors, the Group Executive
Committee and the Vice-Presidents community.

ANTI-CORRUPTION POLICY

Capgemini expects all Group employees to adhere to the
seven core values and to the principles expressed in this
Code and in particular, that they commit to:
•	 respecting applicable laws and regulations;
•	 applying health and safety rules and contributing to the
creation of a safe and inclusive work environment;
•	 acting responsibly in the marketplace, complying with
applicable competition laws and regulations and anticorruption provisions, avoiding conflicts of interest and
insider trading, and providing accurate commercial and
financial information;
•	 building honest and clear relationships with clients,
business partners, and our suppliers;
•	 maintaining the security and integrity of the assets of the
Group and of any third parties with whom we work;
•	 supporting the communities and respecting the
environment in which we operate; and
•	 refusing the use of forced labor and child labor.
All new hires are expected to undertake to comply with the
principles set out in the Code of Business Ethics and to
complete an e-learning module on the Code.

At the end of 2015

126,000+
employees

82%
Global headcount

Completed our
Code of Business Ethics e-learning module

In 2011, the Group distributed a document concerning the
prevention of corruption, in eleven languages. At the end of
2015, more than 132,000 employees had followed the related
e-learning module, available in six languages. This represented
more than 87% of the Group’s employees.
In addition, new employees are expected to undertake to
comply with the principles set out in the Group Anti-Corruption
Policy and to complete the related e-learning module.

GROUP COMPETITION LAW POLICY

In 2012, the Group distributed a document concerning
competition laws, in eight languages. At the end of 2015, more
than 121,000 employees had followed the related e-learning
module, available in six languages. This represented more
than 79% of the Group’s employees at this date.
In addition, new employees are expected to undertake to
comply with the principles set out in the Competition Law
Policy and to complete the related e-learning module.

HUMAN RIGHTS

As identified by our assessment of materiality, our stakeholders
have raised the issue of human rights specifically as being of
importance to Capgemini and our business. Work on a specific
stand alone human rights statement commenced in 2015, to
provide clarity and guidance regarding our allegiance to the
principles of the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights.
Due to the decentralized nature of the Group, it is important that
this statement be applicable to and understood by all and as
such, work continues into 2016.

BUSINESS ETHICS TRAINING FOR
MANAGEMENT

In 2015, six three-hour business ethics workshops were held
around the world, covering more than 100 managers and
top executives (mainly Grade F, i.e. the top of the managerial
pyramid). These sessions, based on case studies, aimed
to give practical advice on how to deal with ethics and
compliance issues and to highlight management’s role in
setting an example. They also helped develop local action
plans to cascade these messages to lower management
levels, with the help of the Ethics & Compliance Officers.
Additionally in 2015, a new initiative was developed for more
than 4,300 Grade E managers (i.e. the grade just below top
management) based on a “Train the Trainers” methodology.
More than 65 top managers have been trained to deliver more
than 200 sessions of a three-hour business ethics workshop.
At the end of 2015, more than 1,500 Grade E managers had
followed one of the sessions. This represented more than 35%
of the target population at this date.

9

2.4	 Raising Concern Procedure
The Code of Business Ethics provides that any of our people faced with a question or issue involving ethics or compliance
should discuss it first with his/her local manager. If the issue is not resolved by the manager, or if the employee is not
comfortable discussing the matter with his/her manager or if other procedures for dealing with individual grievances are not
applicable, they may use the dedicated Raising Concern Procedure (RCP). This is a dedicated procedure for requesting advice
and raising concerns.
Our people may in this way seek advice and guidance on appropriate action from the local General Counsel - Ethics and
Compliance Officer or even directly from the CECO in Paris. In operation since late 2013, the RCP is applied on a case-by-case
basis in 39 countries where the Group operates, in accordance with applicable legislation.

Ethisphere’s World’s Most Ethical Companies
In March 2016, Capgemini was named one of the World’s Most Ethical Companies by the Ethisphere Institute for the fourth
consecutive year and for the first time has been included in the Standard Ethics index. These awards recognize our longstanding
commitment to company-wide ethical leadership, compliance practices and corporate responsibility. It also highlights our
commitment to leading ethical business standards and practices, ensuring long-term value to key stakeholders around the world
including clients, our people, suppliers and business partners.

“We are delighted to be recognized, for the
fourth year running, as one of the Word’s Most
Ethical companies by the Ethisphere Institute.
The intelligence explosion to come requires
organizations in the IT and consulting industry
to put ethics at the top of their business
agenda. While future technological capabilities
are hard to predict, organizations will certainly
require robust ethics to navigate new waters
wisely. Capgemini’s seven core values are
a valuable competitive asset and play a vital
role in how we contribute today to the world
of tomorrow – in this respect, a solid CR&S
program contributes to sound ethics.”
Philippe Christelle,
Chief Ethics and Compliance Officer

10

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

3.	
ENVIRONMENTAL 					
	SUSTAINABILITY
We are committed to understanding, measuring and reducing our
environmental impacts.
We recognize that the business services we provide have an impact on
the environment. We work hard to reduce this impact by saving energy
and reducing waste, as well as by reducing business travel. We also
work to raise employee awareness of the critical issues related to the
environment.

2015 Highlights:
Capgemini achieved ISO 14001 certification covering
Capgemini North America, Sweden and Capgemini
France, (extending coverage to include operations in
eleven countries) bringing the total coverage to 76%
of our Group headcount;

We were named as a winner in the Golden Peacock
Awards for Sustainability, for managing natural
resources and conserving electricity and water in
Capgemini India; and

Total emissions across the Group have
decreased by nearly 4%.

11

The identification of Capgemini’s material environmental impacts has resulted from the materiality assessment (as described
earlier) and local initial environmental reviews (IERs) as part of country ISO 14001 certifications. Identification of other
material issues have emerged through local assessments, such as an independent Climate Change Risk Assessment in
the UK and through the CO2 performance ladder program and Multi Year Program (MYP) in the case of the Netherlands.
Whereas the materiality assessment highlighted the importance of climate change to our stakeholders and the need to
reduce our carbon footprint, the IERs provided greater granularity relating to these impacts, including:

Energy
Consumption

Business
Travel

Office
Waste

Supply
Chain

Business
Operations

As a Group, Capgemini remains cognizant of the importance of climate change including the responsibility of the business
to do our part in limiting global temperatures to below a two degree Celsius rise and potential implications to our business
including energy security. Our efforts to reduce and minimize impacts through our energy use, waste management and
business travel continue across our Group through our maturing Environmental Sustainability program. During 2015, business
travel was identified as our largest source of carbon (accounting for 52% of our emissions).
We are also committed to identifying and complying with all local and international legislation and other relevant requirements
relating to this impact in the various geographies in which we operate. Our belief that environmental responsibility drives
shareholder value provides the impetus to go beyond simple environmental compliance. It allows us to provide clients with new
services and help them with their own challenges, while enabling us to improve our own efficiency and reduce operational costs.
The implications of climate change present risk and also opportunity throughout our business. For example, we are aware and
mitigate against the risk posed by extreme weather events at our data centers ensuring our clients have continuous service no
matter the weather conditions. We also recognize the opportunities, both current and potential, to use technology to assist our
clients with their own climate change challenges.

3.1	 Group environmental policy
The Group Environmental Policy, endorsed by Chairman and CEO Paul Hermelin, sets out the measures that all countries are
expected to take in terms of the environment. It reinforces our commitment to respecting the environment and the continual
improvement of environmental performance across our global operations, specifically in the areas of energy, business travel and
waste management. Water is an increasing expectation and as such related data is gathered and logged wherever possible.
The Policy can be found at: https://www.capgemini.com/resources/group-environmental-policy

3.2	 Group environmental management approach
Throughout 2015, Capgemini continued to extend the scope of its environmental management systems with Capgemini France,
Sweden and North America added to the list of countries with certification under ISO 14001. This certification increases the
percentage of operations covered by the standard to nearly 76% measured by headcount.
Germany, Finland, Poland and Sweden Sogeti will start their certification journey in 2016.
Capgemini’s most material environmental impacts result from our use of energy (in both offices and data centers), as a result of
business related travel and from the disposal of office waste. These impacts, together with smaller impacts such as from water
consumption and fugitive air-conditioning emissions, are measured and reported as part of our sustainability accounting and
reporting processes. Other environmental impacts, such as those on bio-diversity and noise pollution, while regularly reviewed,
are not currently considered significantly material to our operations and consequently are not discussed further in this report.

12

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

Our Environmental Impacts:
While certain local variations may exist, the Group’s main environmental impacts are shown below:

52%

- Business Travel

The international and domestic business travel we undertake, by road, rail, air, and from staying
in hotels, all consume fossil fuels which contribute to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.
Tackling this remains a major challenge for our industry, which is reliant on the mobility of its
people in order to best utilize their skills and experience in serving customers worldwide.
We continue to take advantage of opportunities created by remote technology solutions such
as video conferencing. We have also improved remote collaboration tools to facilitate remote
working and allow greater flexibility. We are progressing the global roll out of our ‘TravelWell’
program which takes holistic view on travel, focusing on safety and wellbeing, as well as
supporting our people to make smart and sustainable travel choices.

47%

- Energy Consumption

Our most direct environmental impact comes from the consumption of electricity, gas and oil to
light, heat and power our offices and data centers.
Data centers are particularly energy intensive due to the high level of IT equipment to be
housed, powered and cooled.

>1%

- F-Gas, Waste and Water

The man made gases from our use of air conditioning units are known as F-gases and carry
a significant global warming potential. The associated emissions from a number of these
gases are included in our overall emissions (as per the Kyoto Protocol), with the remaining
identified gases (outside the Protocol) also identified and reported separately within the data
tables at the end of this section. The material impact of our usage is low in comparison
with emissions from travel and energy.
Much of the waste that the Group produces is generated by office consumables and packaging.
Capgemini aims to minimize the amount of waste that is sent to landfill by promoting the
development of recycling facilities. We also work with our people and key suppliers to reduce the
overall amount of waste generated on our premises by our daily operations.
We ensure that all electronic equipment is recycled in accordance with local legislation.
Water use is not considered a material issue across the Group - however, within certain key
countries such as India and Brazil issues around potential water scarcity make this a more
material impact.

13

3.3	 Environmental performance
During 2015 our global carbon accounting and management service continued to cover 28 of our countries and over 98% of our
global headcount. In addition, an estimate has been included to cover the remaining headcount based on a calculation of
emissions per head.
Our robust approach to environmental data collection and reporting is essential for meeting corporate reporting obligations, such
as the French Grenelle II legislation, at Group level, and the Carbon Reduction Commitment legislation for Capgemini UK.
Capgemini’s Carbon Accounting and Sustainability Reporting service is also available to clients.

GROUP TARGETS
Following the standardization of data collection and carbon management, our stable baseline of data has been set as 2014.
Throughout 2015, the Group CR&S team formulated a series of global environmental targets in order to drive performance
across the Group. These targets will be set to assist countries in adhering to Group Environment Policy and to also provide
a framework within which to drive their own agendas at the local level. In 2016 these targets will be presented to the Group
CR&S Board for final approval before publication.
Locally set targets are in place in a number of our countries including (but not limited to):

Capgemini UK
•	 In the UK a number of targets were refreshed in
2015 including an overall ambition to deliver
annualized emissions reductions in our ecosystem
of three times our own emissions by 2017, through
the engagement of our services and programs
with clients, suppliers and our people.

Capgemini North America
•	 Capgemini USA has committed to a reduction of 20% in
the number of non chargeable flights in 2016; and
•	 Capgemini Canada has set a target of a 20% reduction in
the number taxi journeys undertaken in 2016.

14

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

ISO 14001 program case study
Since 2009 a growing number of countries have implemented an Environmental Management System (EMS) according to
ISO 14001. We have seen how this structured approach towards continuous environmental improvement helps countries in
driving results. By streamlining our internal capabilities concerning environmental management, we are able to move more of our
operations in an increasing number of countries towards certification. We designed a Group EMS platform with all the necessary
corporate and local processes and tools that make it possible to implement ISO 14001 in a very efficient and effective way,
from the perspective of both time and budget. We are regularly complimented externally for the robustness of our EMS platform
through the audit process.
In 2014 Capgemini India, as a whole entity, was added to the group of ISO 14001 certified countries, in 2015 Capgemini
Sweden followed that example with North America completing during December 2015, bringing the total number of country
operations to 11. Other countries, like France, extended the scope of their existing certificate to further Strategic Business
Units which, in total, brought the Capgemini coverage by headcount to approximately 76% across the Group (without IGATE).
Work on an implementation in Germany also commenced in 2015. By 2017, we strive to have all of our ten major countries (by
headcount) ISO 14001 certified. We recognize that there will be new challenges along the way, such as organizational changes
as demonstrated by the recent IGATE acquisition. However, we remain confident in our approach.

Capgemini Netherlands
•	 30% reduction in emissions by 2016
compared to 2011; and
•	 to be CO2 neutral by 2020.

Capgemini France
•	 in support of the COP21, Capgemini
France announced a target of a 20%
reduction in overall carbon from our
French operations by 2020.
Capgemini India
•	 30% reduction in emissions per
employee by 2020;
•	 20% reduction in water consumption
per employee by 2017; and
•	 zero waste to landfill by 2017.

15

3.4 Key performance
indicators and methodology
The environmental data presented in this our 2015 CR&S
Update have been taken from the Carbon Accounting and
Sustainability Reporting system and covers 28 countries
(Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Guatemala, India,
Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands,
Norway, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the UK, the USA and Vietnam) covering 98% of
Group headcount (excluding IGATE). We have estimated the
data for the remaining operations by headcount, by applying
a relevant uplift to each emission source to account for
operations where we do not have data collection processes in
place. This estimated data is provided within the environmental
data tables labeled as ‘Non Reporting Countries’ and further
explanations are given in the table footnotes within the
Appendices.  

The 2014 data, against which the latest 2015 data is
compared, has been restated since our 2014 Registration
Document, Annual Financial Report.
These change are due to a number of significant
improvements to the 2014 data, such as the inclusion of
Scope 3 electricity transmission and distribution losses, the
replacement of estimated Q4 2014 data with the now available
actual data and the inclusion of an estimate for those non
reporting countries where our operations are too small to be
included in our formal reporting processes.

Even where data is available for a particular country,
it has sometimes been necessary to make a number
of assumptions: where only partial data are available,
extrapolation has been employed to estimate total annual
impact. In general, fourth quarter data for 2015 was not
available at the time of reporting and therefore has been
extrapolated based on available data for 2015. Other
extrapolations have included:

OVERALL EMISSIONS

•	 estimating 2015 data based upon available 2014 data,
(according to documented methodologies related to
differing circumstances and covering all aspects of energy,
travel, water and waste management);
•	 estimating emissions data based on available cost data
(employing metrics such as the cost per kWh for electricity
and gas; and cost per liter of diesel or per kilometer of
travel); and
•	 estimating emissions data for a facility based on data
available for other facilities (estimating electricity usage
based on area of the facility, estimating waste disposal
& water consumption based on headcount of the facility).
Further disclosure about the scope of data available and
extrapolations employed is presented in footnotes under
the data tables.

16

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

This non reporting country estimate accounts for just over 28%
of the difference between the 2014 figures presented in this
report and those published in our 2015 Report. Travel makes up
18% of the difference and the majority with around 53% of the
difference is energy which now includes transmission losses.

In 2015, Capgemini’s carbon emissions from operations
representing 100% of the Group’s headcount (excluding
IGATE) were 346,254tCO2e as calculated using the emission
factors and methodology recommended by the UK
Government’s Department of Environment Farming
and Rural Affairs (DEFRA).
Comparison with the 2014 data shows that total emissions
across the group have decreased by nearly 4%. Within the
same period, the emissions of our largest operations (India,
Netherlands, UK, France and North America) have decreased
by nearly 3% (from 285,085 tCO2e to 276,945 tCO2e) despite
an average headcount raise of nearly 6%.
Within this report, the 2014 emission figures have been restated
from a reported 328,500 tCO2e to 360,191 tCO2e (a difference
of 31,691 tCO2e). This is due to a number of significant
improvements to the 2014 data, as described previously.
For the purposes of carbon accounting per head, an average
headcount over the year has been calculated for both 2014
and 2015, which represents a more accurate per headcount
calculation than using the December 2014 head count as
compared to the December 2015 headcount. As a consequence,
the headcount figures within this section may vary slightly from
the absolute figures quoted in other sections of this report.

2014

2.51 tCO2e

2015
6.5%

Decrease

2.35 tCO2e

In CO2 emissions per head

Following the restatement of 2014 data, emissions per head
were calculated as 2.51 tCO2e (against an average headcount
of 143,471). In 2015, a reduction of 6.5% to 2.35 tCO2e per
head (against an average headcount of 147,524) has resulted
from our continued efforts to reduce our carbon footprint
around the Group. As these calculations include those
emissions associated with our data center operations, it is
not truly representative of the emissions emitted according
to headcount (including data centers).

ENERGY CONSUMPTION

Across the Group, total reported energy use has reduced a little under 2% from 370,425 MWh in 2014 to 363,658 MWh in 2015
which, when you consider our headcount average rose just under 3% within the period, is an achievement attributed to the
increasing focus on environmental management in an expanding number of our operations.
Emissions associated with our use of energy have fallen a little over 6% in the same period due to a decrease in the use of diesel
(31% reduction in associated emissions) and electricity (3% reduction in associated emissions) across the Group and a change
in the emission factor for electricity as compared to 2014 across France, India, Netherlands, North America and the UK. This
is reflected in the decrease of just over 6% (from 143,567 tCO2e to 134,537 tCO2e) in emissions related to energy use for our
largest operating countries.
Emissions associated with Energy
Consumption have fallen by

6%

•	 in India, energy related emissions have reduced by around
5% which is largely attributable to the reduction in 2015
emission factors and also a  reduction in the use of diesel
(gas oil) leading to a 30% reduction in associated emissions;
•	 in France, the total energy consumption increased by 10%
between 2014 and 2015 as a result of the addition of 29
facilities (23 following the acquisition of Euriware in 2014).
Accordingly, the associated emissions from energy have
risen by 11% (due also to additional data available from
Euriware facilities in 2015); during 2015, our operations in
France procured 47% of electricity from renewable sources.
As we are not yet able to report according to the latest
However, increased purchase of renewable energy is not
yet reflected in our reported emissions for France as we are
not yet able to report Scope 2 market-based emissions.
This will be a priority for 2016.
•	 within the UK, total reported energy use in MWh
has reduced by a little over 4%, primarily due to the
rationalization of our facilities, with three offices and
a section of one data centre closing during 2015.

Whilst energy usage across the
group has fallen by almost

2%

	 We also completed the final phase of a sustainability flagship
project at our Aston office, installing solar photovoltaic panels
on the roof, which complement the small solar thermal
system already in place. During 2015, the panels saved over
£5,700 in electricity costs and generated over 58,000kWh
electricity. In addition, at our Merlin data centre in Swindon
we improved the way the Building Management System
controls air flow and cooling.  Emissions from energy use
are showing a significant 11% decrease compared to 2014,
partly due to the 5.2% decrease in the DEFRA grid average
electricity emission factor for the UK;
•	 the significant reduction in energy use (15%) and associated
emissions (around 13%) in the Netherlands is largely as a result
of the closure of offices in Voorburg and Amersfoort and a the
move from our large Amsterdam facility to a much smaller
facility within the city. This has in turn resulted in reductions in
the emissions associated with district heating (22% reduction),
natural gas (67%) and office electricity (17%) since 2014;
•	 in North America, overall energy use decreased by nearly
3% with an associated reduction in emissions.

17

Several countries including Netherlands, France and the UK purchased a significant portion of their electricity from renewable
energy sources in 2015. This is not yet reflected in the Scope 2 emission calculations as location-based emission factors have
been applied to all the data (rather than supplier-specific ones). Work has begun to engage with our energy suppliers across the
Group to ensure The Greenhouse Gas Protocol revised Scope 2 emission guidelines can be followed from 2016 onwards.
Our business model of collaborative working alongside our clients necessitates travel within our globalized markets. Business Travel
has therefore been identified as one of Capgemini’s significant environmental impacts. However, we continue to invest in providing
our people with alternatives to travel and initiatives to assist our colleagues in making informed decisions when travelling.
Our award-winning UK TravelWell program began its global deployment in 2015 and is focused on ensuring that the right tools
are in place to support client delivery, while reducing travel impacts. In the UK, TravelWell won the Sustainable Transport and
Travel category of the Sustainability Leaders Awards in November 2014.
As previously highlighted, the restatement of 2014 data showed an increase in travel emissions when converting the estimated
Q4 travel available in the 2014 report, to actual data, which accounted for 5,850 tCO2e. A comparison of the restated 2014 data
with the available 2015 data indicates that our business travel emissions of 180,227 tCO2e (which make up over half of our global
carbon footprint) is just under a 2% decrease over the 2014 figure of 183,347 tCO2e. This is a particular achievement considering
the overall average head count rise of just under 3% in the same period.

TRAVEL EMISSIONS:
2014

183,347 tCO2e

-2%

2015

180,227 tCO2e

Decrease
in travel
emissions

Despite a 3% average
headcount rise during
the same period

At the country level, the main results were:
•	 in India, emissions from travel increased by nearly 6% with
a corresponding increase in average headcount of 8%
within the same period;
•	 business travel emissions have increased by just under 7%
in France, which is also proportionate to the 7.5% increase
in average headcount over the period;
•	 in the UK, business travel emissions have reduced by 14%
since 2014, due to a continued focus on reducing business
travel. A genuine trend toward the use of smaller vehicles
has been identified with a reduction in the use of medium
and large petrol and diesel cars, especially within the
company car fleet, and an increase in use of smaller vehicle
types. Reductions in flights and hotels throughout the year
have been observed with a reduction in long haul flights
of over 20% (which has had the effect of countering an
increase in short haul and domestic flights);

18

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

•	 a sustained focus on reducing emissions from business
travel in The Netherlands has contributed to a reduction of
13% since 2014. This has been achieved by encouraging
the use of public transport and implementing a new car
lease arrangement to encourage people to switch to low
emission company cars; and
•	 business travel for North America has increased by 10%
since 2014. During the period there has been a 4% rise in
average headcount, however, the data collection has also
been improved with data taken from the expense system
in 2015, which more accurately captures business travel
across the US and Canada.

OTHER SOURCES

F-gas emissions, waste tonnage (including general, recycled and e-waste) and water usage (consumption primarily for use in
sanitary areas, kitchen facilities and some data center cooling) are also provided in the table below. Water data continues to be
collected as available, with no assessment done to date regarding potential scarcity of supply across our global locations. Across
several locations, we have invested in technology to reduce water use, including rainwater harvesting equipment at an office in
the UK and an office in India and improvements to tap fittings and flush controls in several locations.
Total waste tonnage (including general, recycled and e-waste) for 2015 was 3,281 tons, which represents a 9% decrease
compared to 2014, due to a significant drive to reduce waste in our largest operations.
The volume of measured water (used and recycled) is 851,316 m3.
F-Gas emissions for 2014 have been restated to 754 tCO2e. During 2015 it was identified that a number of F-gases which are
not covered by the Kyoto Protocol had been included in the totals in error. The data was therefore recalculated. When compared
against the 2015 figure (1,456 tCO2e) this represents a 93% increase which we believe to be due to improvements in reporting as
well as increases to the DEFRA emission factors for refrigerant gases.
Further country-level detail is provided in the tables in appendix A and in the footnotes below them.

Total Waste
3,281 tons

(Inc. General, recycled
and e-waste)

Total Water Usage
851,316 m3
(Inc. used and recycled)

F-Gas Emissions
1,456 tCO2e

(this represents a 48%
increase which we believe
to be due to improvements
in reporting as well as
increases to the DEFRA
emission factors for
refrigerant gases.)

19

4.	COMMUNITY
	ENGAGEMENT
We seek to align our Community Engagement program with our core business practice.
Harnessing the talent and skills of our people allows us to add maximum value to our
communities, whilst giving our people the chance to use and develop their own skills in a new
and challenging environment.
Our community program continues to leverage the value of our wider networks, collaborating
with our charity partners, clients and business partners to tackle important social challenges
that our business cannot address alone.

2015 Highlights:
We launched a new Global Community strategy.
Encompassing a range of initiatives, the program
aims to positively impact the lives of one million
people by 2020 through our global education and
skills programs;

Capgemini acquired IGATE, who, with their
established ICare community program closely align
with and strengthen our CR&S focus particularly
pertaining to education and skills;

In our internally run Global Community Engagement
Awards, 131 entries were received from 19 countries,
with over 9,000 of our people voting in the ‘People’s
Choice’ award; and

We invested a total of € 2,124,000 in local
communities across the globe.

20

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

“Community Engagement is a strong and long-standing
commitment for Capgemini. I am always impressed by
the passion of our volunteers and the energy of our teams
who are doing incredible work in their communities.”
Paul Hermelin
Capgemini Group Chairman & CEO

OUR COMMUNITY
ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM
Our Community Engagement program is about leveraging the power of our people and the
expertise of our business to make a positive impact on the communities in which we live and work.

OUR GLOBAL COMMUNITY
PRIORIY IS TO IMPROVE:
EDUCATION

SKILLS

WE AIM TO POSITIVELY IMPACT THE LIVES OF
1 MILLION PEOPLE BY 2020
WE WILL ACHIEVE THIS
THROUGH OUR
PEOPLE

We support the charitable efforts of our people,
through our internally run Global Community
Engagement Awards.

PARTNERS

We work with strategic charity partners to
deliver our programs:

Our commitment to education and skills not only helps the next generation, but is also a key contributor to economic growth
and wellbeing around the world. We believe that we are contributing to reducing the potential longer-term skills gaps within our
sector. Our strategic aim is to provide skills and expertize to the communities in which our people live and operate, in such a way
that those communities, and the individuals living within them, are assisted to develop and grow. Our Community Engagement
program delivers value through volunteering, fundraising, donations and pro bono work. we are making a positive impact in on.
Our intention is to provide as many opportunities as we can for our people to engage in activities for which they have passion
and commitment. We embed our Community Engagement program within our business lines and client assignments. We
measure and share this commitment with our people, our partners and our clients through various communication channels
such as this report, our Capgemini website, our internal intranet (Talent) and the annual Group Employee Survey.

21

4.1	 Our global initiatives

Our professional services business, Sogeti, continues to
provide practical IT assistance to PlaNet Finance, and has
done since their creation in 1998. PlaNet Finance is an
international non-profit organization focused on enabling
those in poverty to access financial services in order to bring
about sustained improvements to their living standards.
Sogeti’s assistance, comprising of technical expertise and
critical IT systems support, has enabled PlaNet Finance to
focus on their core business of providing financial inclusion.
Sogeti manages PlaNet Finance’s computer systems by
hosting computer applications including intranet, electronic
messaging, and online training, and provides services related
to human resources.

Since the beginning of our partnership
with MicroWorld

1,662

micro entrepreneurs’
projects have
been funded

In addition, in late 2011, Capgemini and Sogeti launched
a dedicated website, in association with PlaNet Finance’s
microcredit platform, MicroWorld, to promote the growth of
micro-credit in the most disadvantaged countries. This site
provides a secure platform that enables our people to finance
micro-credit projects around the world in the form of online
loans to socially responsible projects.

Supported by

In 2012, we launched the MicroWorld platform in France,
Ireland, the Netherlands, Sweden, Norway, Denmark
and Germany, with North America joining in 2014. Since
the beginning of our involvement, a total of 1,662 micro
entrepreneurs’ projects have been co-funded, with loans
amounting to €133,790 from more than 1,400 members.
We are currently working with MicroWorld to enlarge
the scope of support that our people can offer through
the platform, via skills sharing, tutoring, mentoring and
volunteering opportunities and as a result, hope to increase
the number of potential beneficiaries.

With loans

22

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

more than

1,400

members

amounting to

€133,790

Since 2005, Capgemini has been working with the Naandi
Foundation on the “Nanhi Kali” program, which focuses
on supporting the education of girls from disadvantaged
backgrounds in India. The program provides academic,
material and social support, giving girls access to quality
education and working with parents and local communities
to break down cultural barriers to gender equality. In
2015, Capgemini people from 11 countries contributed
to the support of 5,502 school girls. Since 2007, 11 of
Capgemini’s countries of operation have supported 67,992
school years of education.

Through our partnership with Naandi and our commitment to
other community programmes aimed at improving education
and skills across the world, we seek to align ourselves with
Goal four of the UN Sustainable Development Goals. In the
UK our focus on working with those currently outside of
education, employment or training demonstrates our passion
for lifelong education opportunities and for reaching those who
have been cut-off from mainstream education services.

SDG Goal 4 – Education –
“Ensure inclusive equitable quality
education and promote lifelong
learning opportunities for all”

23

4.2	 Global Community Engagement Awards (GCEA)
In 2014 we launched the Global Community Engagement Awards to champion, recognize and celebrate centrally the local
success of our people, who go above and beyond to make a difference to their communities, adding value to our brand and to
our business. The awards operate under five categories:
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

Volunteer Initiative of the Year
Best Fundraising Award
Community Innovation Award
Client Collaboration Award
The People’s Choice Award

In 2015:

131

Entries
received

The Global Community
Engagement Award
entries included:

Brazil: We make children’s dreams come true (Irene Barella)
Every year, post offices in several cities in Brazil receive letters from
children with wishes for Christmas gifts. The post offices in turn make
these letters available to people who want to help and fulfill these
wishes. Capgemini Brazil participated in the initiative for one month
during 2015, with volunteers from each business unit, across all our
Brazil offices, collecting letters from the post office every day. The
letters contained many different wishes, from childrenasking for a toy or
a doll to one child asking for a job for their father.

24

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

19

Countries
represented

9,000

People voted in the
‘People’s Choice
Award’

Finland: Clean Baltic Sea: Tanker Safety Program, Enhanced
Navigation Support System (ENSI) to Oil Tankers (Ilkka Kankare)
Since 2008, volunteers from Capgemini Finland have given their time
and expertize to an initiative to save the Baltic Sea: The Tanker Safety
Program spearheaded by the John Nurminen Foundation. The scope of
our volunteers’ work includes planning, facilitation and documentation
of several significant workshops, drawing up the requirement
specifications for two digital services, and offering help with expert
reports, service demonstrations, as well as the renewal of the
Foundation’s customer register. In 2014, the Foundation highlighted in
their annual report the invaluable partnership with Capgemini and our
pro bono work which has continued into 2015 with the facilitation of
strategy workshops for the organization.
Poland: RoboCap - Computer Science and robotics workshops
for children (Piotr Smyk)
A group of IT engineers from Capgemini Software Solutions Center
Wrocław in Poland arranged Robocap, a series of science and robotics
workshops for children. The workshops were delivered to children and
tutors and were held in Capgemini offices, a hospital, a school and an
orphanage. To help address the gender imbalance in STEM subjects
(science, technology, engineering and maths), 50% of the places in each
workshop were reserved for young women.

India: IGATE: Summer camp with ICARE (Sumit Babu)
ICARE has been running within our IGATE function since
2013, before the US-listed organization was acquired by
Capgemini in 2015. The initiative conducts summer camps in
urban India. These summer camps are for children with
extreme low income backgrounds, from working class families
and studying in Government schools where extra-curricular
activities are not given their due importance. The summer
camps utilize the children’s vacation time by providing a fun
and innovative way of learning, instilling values and creating an
awareness of social issues. In 2015, ICARE volunteers and
IGATE CR&S teams conducted these camps across seven of
our locations in India where IGATE operate.

Australia: Sociable Charitable People
Capgemini colleague, Anthony Woods developed ‘Sociable Charitable People’,  a group for people who enjoy volunteering in
a social atmosphere. The group endeavors to provide a single channel in which potential volunteers may browse, select and plan
the time they wish to donate. Anthony came up with the idea of using an existing Meet up platform to help provide a non-invasive
and public forum in which volunteers, like him, can find and participate in fun volunteer opportunities. The group currently has
over 190 members and provides volunteers to dozens of charitable events. http://www.meetup.com/SociableCharitablePeople/

25

4.3	 Other national initiatives
Capgemini India

In December 2015 heavy rains and subsequent flooding devastated Chennai, India, affecting
many of our colleagues and their families. In order to support and raise funds to assist those
affected, our Global Business Services Cookbook was organized by country and delivery
center, containing a collection of 150 wonderful recipes sent in by our Business Services
colleagues from all over the world. This little book demonstrates the generosity, the spirit of
sharing and the rich diversity of our people who work together every day across the world in
a strong spirit of camaraderie and collaboration.
Capgemini India has developed a comprehensive program of work to touch lives in the
communities in which we operate. The program covers the areas of education, environment,
employment and emergency response. The program includes initiatives such as:

Education

Environment

Employment

Emergency
Response

•	 ‘Enlight’, a Capgemini
scholarship program
for girl child education
focused on disadvantaged
backgrounds;

•	 Partnering with
a municipal co-operation
to start two waste
recycling units in Mumbai
and Bangalore; and

•	 Initiating employability
centers across nine
locations providing skills
based training aligned to
market requirements; and

•	 Capgemini scholarship
for technical and medical
education for 90 young
people pursuing a career
in engineering and
medicine;

•	 Partnering with WWF
to set up a digital
resource center
providing a platform
for environmental
education awareness and
knowledge sharing.

•	 Initiating five centers
for young people with
disabilities providing
training towards economic
empowerment.

•	 Providing immediate
relief following flooding
in Jammu Kashmir, the
earthquake in Nepal and
flooding in Chennai where
many of our people were
affected.

•	 School adoption projects
across 90 schools in nine
locations; and
•	 12 digital literacy
centers were set up to
empower and educate
communities including
building awareness of
relevant governmental
entitlements.

26

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

Capgemini France

In Capgemini France around 300 of our people are engaged in the project Passeport Avenir,
which provides voluntary mentorship through associations with engineering or management
schools and universities for individual student coaching. Over 300 young people have been
supported since the scheme’s launch, to develop their professional skills and employability.

Capgemini UK

Capgemini UK have been patrons of the Prince’s Trust since 2008, helping the UK’s most
disadvantaged young people into employment. Our people continue to deliver a wide range
of activities in support of the Trust including holding the annual Capgemini Golf Day, hosting
a Million Makers Challenge and cycling the Palace to Palace bike ride. In 2015 we announced
a new Digital Partnership with the Trust with an aim to change the lives of 600 young people over
four years by teaching the skills that they need to develop a career in today’s digital economy.

Capgemini North America

Annually since 2012, colleagues from over 20 locations across Capgemini North America unite
and serve in their local communities. Branded ‘Capgemini Cares’, these events and projects
are identified by local teams and have included everything from supporting local food banks
and cleaning up parks to assisting local homeless shelters. In North America, Capgemini
Consulting completed a pro bono assignment for the international cleft palate charity, Smile
Train, focused on improving the efficiency of their worldwide operations. The impact of the
assignment, supporting Smile Train’s goal of delivering one million cleft lip and palate surgeries,
was recognized by Consulting Magazine with the project receiving their Excellence in Social &
Community Investment Award.

Capgemini Germany

Capgemini Germany is actively involved in several projects to support the refugees within this
region. Activities include collecting clothes and donations for refugees living in emergency
accommodation, making Christmas gifts for underage refugees living in a children’s home
in Berlin and offering internships for students of Kiron University, which is an open university
for refugees. Capgemini Germany is currently leading an initiative which leverages our digital
expertise and aims to create a more effective interface between politicians, administration,
NGOs and IT companies. This project links with other members of Initiative D21 which is
Germany’s largest partnership between policy-makers and businesses, working to shape and
develop the digital society. In addition, we are participating in recruitment activities on platforms
such as www.workeer.de, which offers opportunities for employment to refugees. All projects
are intended to support the welcome and integration of refugees, by helping them gain access
to education, internships or employment.

27

5.	PEOPLE CULTURE
At Capgemini we understand that business value cannot be achieved through technology
alone. Our success, brand identity and client experience are determined by the talents of our
people and are underpinned by our “People matter, results count” ethos.
“People Culture” is the term we use to encapsulate our focus on providing a diverse and
inclusive workplace culture, which offers people the opportunity to build successful and
rewarding careers. We place the health, safety and wellbeing of our people among our top
priorities and actively support their professional development.

2015 Highlights:
The percentage of women in the workforce continued
to rise in 2015, increasing by 0.7 point over 2015 to
reach 29.5% at year end.

We developed an unconscious bias training program
which was attended by approximately 200 of the
Group’s senior executives;

Received a number of Diversity & Inclusion
awards including, The Times Top 50 Employers
for Women in the UK and Best Diversity
Employer’s in Canada; and

We now have local women’s networks in Australia,
Belgium, France, India, Italy, the Netherlands, North
America, Spain and the UK.

28

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

5.1	 Diversity and Inclusion (D&I)

Over 180,000 people

In more than 40 countries

Representing nearly
110 nationalities

With over 180,000 people, Capgemini is proud to represent around 110
nationalities across more than 40 countries. As such, we are committed to
creating an inclusive workplace culture that provides our people with the
opportunity for a successful and rewarding career and ensures their wellbeing. We believe that it is the factors which make people different, which
offer valuable sources of innovation and creativity, enabling us to generate new
ideas, anticipate market trends and be thought leaders in our chosen markets.
Diversity and inclusion (D&I) has always been an important part of our
corporate culture, shaping how we operate and work with our stakeholders,
suppliers, clients and our colleagues around the world. This diversity and
inclusion has many facets including gender, disability, ethnicity, age and
lifestyle. At Capgemini we also include broader dimensions of diversity such as
experience, personality, communication and working styles – together known
as “diversity of thought”. We believe that the diversity of our people can offer
real competitive advantage. The Group seeks to build a workforce embracing
these wide varieties of profiles, experiences, and cultures, enabling Capgemini
to better understand the requirements of end users and partner more
collaboratively with our clients. Our commitment is enshrined within our Group
Diversity and Inclusion Charter (see Appendix C).

Unconscious Bias

Being an employer of choice for talented men and women is vital if we are to unleash the full potential of our Group and deliver
the best results for our clients. Ensuring diversity in gender helps ensure equal growth opportunity and the right working
conditions for all our people, such that they can achieve their career aspirations and personal ambitions regardless of their
gender. Capgemini believes in awarding opportunities to deserving individuals based on merit with no discrimination, be it
negative or positive.
A number of initiatives are in place around the Group to encourage female talent:

Women@Capgemini workshops

During November 2015, Isabelle Roux-Chenu (Group General Counsel) hosted a Women@Capgemini workshop to further the
initiative, which since 2012 has focused on gender balance across the Capgemini Group. A number of male champions were
welcomed to the workshop from different parts of the Group. The Women@Capgemini team proceeded to set objectives and
scope for the four pillars of Recruit, Retain, Develop and Change Corporate Mentality. Short and long-term plans were presented
with an ability to modify across Capgemini to cater for local implementations.

Mentoring

Capgemini has launched a mentoring program to provide a pathway to help the current and next generation of women
employees rise to the uppermost levels of organizational leadership. The program focuses on high-potential women, who after
having proven their potential and taken charge of their career aspirations, are now looking to grow into leadership roles. It aims
to help mentees set goals, build self-esteem, learn strategies for dealing with work pressures and hone leadership and problem
solving skills. Capgemini is also partnering with the Cherie Blair Foundation in a global external mentoring program to support
women entrepreneurs in developing and emerging economies.

29

Capgemini India

In India, our initiative WinspirE, created four years ago is
aligned to our Women@Capgemini program to foster equal
opportunities for women and men. This program operates
under four pillars, each driving a specific agenda: recruit,
retain, develop and institutional awareness. In 2014 our efforts
were recognized by the Women in Leadership Forum (WILL),
with Capgemini India winning the ‘WILL Best employer for
Women’ award. In 2015 Capgemini India underwent voluntary
benchmarking by WILL to evaluate its diversity effort, which
focuses on building gender balance at leadership level.

“Data is a remarkable way of bringing facts to
the table. The benchmarking exercise showed
us that we were heading in the right direction,
but also identified that there was a lot more
to be done.”
Gayathri Ramamurthy
Diversity Lead
Capgemini India
Capgemini France

Two mandatory e-learning modules on diversity and
recruitment have been in place in Capgemini France
since 2014. In addition, a partnership of mentoring with
the University “Pierre and Marie Curie” has been in place
since 2014, with 25 women students benefiting in 2015
from the support of 25 Capgemini women. This support
included internships and developing an all year round school
professional project, to prepare the students for entering the
professional world.
Capgemini and Sogeti France have also been a signatory
to the “Charte de la Diversité dans l’Entreprise” (French
corporate diversity charter) since 2006, and continue to
actively participate in “IMS Entreprendre pour la Cité”,
an organization responsible for promoting the charter
to increase diversity in France.

30

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

Capgemini Canada

Capgemini Canada has been recognized by Canada’s Best
Diversity Employers in both 2015 and 2016, acknowledging
our exceptional workplace diversity and inclusiveness
program. This competition recognizes successful diversity
initiatives in a variety of areas, including programs for
employees from five groups: (a) Women; (b) Members of visible
minorities; (c) Persons with disabilities; (d) Aboriginal peoples;
and (e) Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgendered/Transsexual
(LGBT) peoples. Of particular note was Capgemini’s
Unconscious Bias training.

Capgemini UK

In April 2015, Capgemini UK was named in The Times Top 50
Employers for Women for the fourth year consecutive year,
demonstrating our ongoing commitment and efforts to achieve
gender equality in the workplace. The unranked alphabetical
list published in partnership with Opportunity Now, (the
Workplace Gender Campaign by Business in the Community
(BITC) contains organizations who are leading on workplace
gender equality.
Capgemini UK also has in place a series of diversity targets:

To increase the proportion
of women to 30% by 2020.
(Against 2013 baseline)

To increase the proportion
of senior women to 20%
by 2020
(Against 2013 baseline)

To ensure that 40% of
graduate and apprentice
hires are women by 2017
(Against 2013 baseline)

5.1.2	Inclusion
In Capgemini, we believe that diversity is the mix of people across every dimension of race, religion, ethnicity, backgrounds,
ability, personality, language, sexual orientation, gender and so on, and that inclusion is how we make this mix work.
In all countries of operation, the Group not only complies with local labor legislation and international labor regulations but our
own charter championing diversity and inclusion. In line with our commitment to the principles of the fundamental conventions
on the labor standards of the International Labour organization and the Principles of the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human
Rights including the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, we ensure that:
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

talented individuals from different backgrounds are recruited and retained;
individuals are shown respect and treated fairly;
our working environment is free from all forms of harassment or abuse;
our people are encouraged and helped to keep a good balance between work and private life;
the health and well being of our employees is supported and encouraged; and
a sound and fair working environment is provided, where our people can develop and flourish.

Capgemini will not tolerate any form of discrimination in the workplace on any grounds. Discrimination can take two forms, direct
and indirect. Direct discrimination occurs when someone is treated less favorably, for example on grounds of their gender, race,
age, disability, religion or sexual orientation. Indirect discrimination occurs when a condition or rule is applied which disqualifies
a large proportion of one group from an activity and there is no genuine reason for imposing that condition. In all countries where
the Group is present, if any of our people feel discriminated against in any form, the “grievance escalation process” enables the
escalation of any complaint. Each claim is investigated fully and disciplinary action can be taken if discrimination is proven.

5.1.3	 Monitoring Diversity & Inclusion
In 2015
Total

29.5%
Of total headcount
were female
Recruitment

32.1%
Of recruits were female
Promotion

23.2%
of Vice-President
promotions were female.

Monitoring is carried out to better assess and understand the position of women within the
Group, in compliance with applicable legislation, i.e. the percentage of females recruited,
leaving and promoted.
Females represented 32.1% of total recruitments (excluding IGATE) in 2015 (rate of
coverage of 99.5%), an increase ratio versus 2014 by 1.5% mostly due to India (where the
bulk of recruitment is) with a ratio improving by 1.9pts at 32% and France (+1.4pts at 24%).
The percentage of women recruited is higher than the female ratio of the Group, which
contributed to the rise in the percentage of women in the workforce at end-2015. The
Benelux region has improved its ratio by more than 6pts till 2013 but remains well below
the Group level.
Nevertheless, the turnover rate total (voluntary and involuntary leavers included) for females
was marginally higher (at equivalent scope to hires) than for the total population.
At the end of 2015, 23.2% of employees who had been promoted to the role of “Vice-President”
were female, a higher percentage than last year (+4.4pts). We have a clear picture of our
female talent pool thanks to talent reviews which are undertaken throughout the Group
and which range from interviews with the Group CEO of the most talented employees
to reviews which take place at the Business Unit level. All Business Units are asked to
ensure that they build a female management talent pool. We are also leveraging leadership
through local management training courses, mentoring by senior executives, and, lastly,
increased visibility of female talents in order to improve the gender-balanced of the
Vice-President community.

31

5.2	Disability
It is important that at Capgemini, those of our people with
a disability are not hindered or held back in anyway, but
have the same opportunities for professional and personal
development as all our people. Being an employer that is
open to people of all abilities not only works toward making us
an attractive and inclusive company to work for, but ensures
a wealth of available talent.

Capgemini France also supports several initiatives and
partners in facilitating the occupational integration of disabled
employees andhelping to break disability-related stereotypes,
including:

In France, an active employment policy for people with
disabilities has been in place since 1996. In 2005, this
approach was boosted with the creation of “La Mission
Handicap”, a specific program dedicated to the inclusion
of disabled people. On October 31, 2012 a new agreement
was signed with employee representatives, which aims to
increase the employability rate of disabled people through
apprenticeships. This three year agreement has an annual
budget of €3.5 million, and will focus onfive key areas:

•	 Accede which supports access to the internet for visually
impaired people;

•	 increasing the employability rate of disabled people from
2.4% to 2.9% in 2016;

In 2015, Capgemini France also greatly increased our
procurement from organizations who support people with
disabilities, increasing our expenditure to about €1.6 million..
Key areas of progress include subcontracting of computing
services to organizations such as Talaron Services and
Arche SI (€200,000 in 2015). A framework agreement with the
companies Elise and Nodixia also resulted in the recycling of
paper, tumblers, D3E on all the French sites.

•	 15% of the total budget will be used to develop
apprenticeships for disabled people, supported by
voluntary and certified tutors. In addition, within the
framework of the HEducap project, Capgemini assists
disabled students at baccalauréat level +2/3 by financing
their studies to enable them to acquire a master’s degree;
•	 supporting employees by adapting working conditions and/
or providing financial assistance for specialist equipment or
the acquisition or customization of a vehicle;
•	 facilitating indirect employment for disabled people through
sub-contractors, for example, a partnership with the GESAT
network which handles the electronic management of all
our personnel files; and
•	 raising awareness through broader communication, to
reduce stereotypes and improve understanding.
The new agreement also includes some notable new
dispositions, such as three more paid days off for employees
who have a disabled child, or upgrading from four to eight
days off for disabled people who need medical care.

32

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

•	 Tadeo which provides sign language for deaf or hearing
impaired people;

•	 Capgemini is a founding member of Hanploi, which
developed the Hanploi.com website dedicated to disabled
people;
•	 Arpejeh, which aims to improve access to training,
qualifications and employment for young disabled people.

•	 In India, Capgemini’s Disability Inclusion program featured
in a research report conducted by Community Business
on “Tapping a Pool of Disabled Talent in India”. The report
positions Capgemini as an employer of choice for students
with disabilities. The program continues to gain momentum
year on year with over 200 people with disabilities finding
rewarding employment with Capgemini, alongside the
training and recruitment of 12 new candidates with a hearing
disability in partnership with iPRIMED (Training organization).

The program has four pillars:
Accessibility: removing barriers to inclusivity, by ensuring accessible infrastructure and a register of grievances.
Emergency evacuation processes have also been reviewed to ensure safe evacuation for people with disabilities
at our Mumbai and Bangalore offices; Capgemini Kolkata offices are now also accessible for people with
disabilities.

Career: ensuring inclusion through recruitment, engagement, and development policies.

Commitment: encouraging and creating employee awareness about employing people with disabilities, the
use of assistance devices, challenging myths and the code of behavior in relation to disability, through a number
of awareness and training programs.
Communication: Spreading inclusion beyond the company, with clients, partners and other organizations.
This includes the partnerships with industry bodies, NGOs and Disability Rights groups such as CII and
NASSCOM and NCPEDP (National Center for Promotion of Employment for Disabled People). The company has
also sponsored and participated in conferences organized by Choice International, a UK-based NGO and the
national conference organized by the NCPEDP, India’s largest disability organization.
In 2015 Capgemini Poland continued to create a working environment adopted for people with disabilities by creating a model
for recruitment, training and inclusion of those with disabilities. Following a successful pilot in 2014, Capgemini Poland now offers
the necessary technology adaptations (such as enlarging visual software, adapted keyboards) andextensive assistance on joining
Capgemini to help ensure equal opportunities within the workplace. Capgemini teams are supported with disability awareness
training, witharound 100 of our people undertaking this training during 2015. In addition, Capgemini Poland is working with The
Managers of the Future Foundation to drive forward this agenda within the Polish Business Services Sector.
Number of people in the group with a disability in 2012-2015
535

2013
2014
2015

428

North
America

United
Kingdom &
Ireland

3

17

Nordic
countries

Benelux

123

90

Germany
and Central
Europe

France and
Morocco

Southern
Europe

93

Asia-Pacific
and Latin
America

177

India

A disability is defined as anything preventing or limiting someone to participate in corporate, social life due to a long term or definitive
reduction of his/her mental or physical capabilities. This covers both voluntary and legal declarations depending on the country.
The coverage rate for the data above is 74.7% of year-end headcount including IGATE. In 2015, figures indicated that the Group
employed 1,468 people with a disability of whom 36.4% are in the United Kingdom and 29.2% are in France. Following the
launch of India’s program in 2012, 177 people with a disability are employed there. Group-wide, 422 more of our people are
working with a disability than in 2011.

33

5.3	 Learning & Development
Capgemini is a people-centered organization where we
recognize that the quality of services provided to our clients
depends on the excellence and motivation of our teams. We
therefore invest in both personal and professional development
and recognize the need for frequent updates to knowledge
and skills in a fast-paced technology sector.
Professional development is supported by our Career &
Competency Framework, which is a performance appraisal
and progression tool tailored according to the account specific
needs of each of Capgemini Group’s businesses and Group
functions. Our Learning & Development teams provide our
people with a broad range of learning sources allowing them
to further develop their capabilities.

Our Approach

Capgemini University’s vision is to support our people, bringing
them together to develop their capabilities and achieve the full
potential of our Group for our clients. It challenges, supports
development, connects our Group and brings to life our values
through formalized packages and cutting edge content using
our Next Generation Learning (NGL) approach and Capgemini
University’s Global Curriculum. In 2015 the University officially
received its second, five year re-accreditation from the EFMD
(European Foundation for Management Development). Capgemini
University received its initial EFMD accreditation in 2009 and
is the only Corporate University from the IT industry to have it.
The accreditation is a mechanism for quality benchmarking,
mutual learning and sharing of good practices where internal selfassessment is combined with an external review from experienced
peers against a comprehensive set of rigorous criteria.
Also in 2015, Capgemini University extended the relationship
between Capgemini and the MaRS Innovation Network to
develop digital and social learning interventions with business
impact, and reinforce our capabilities in digital-age learning.
Our NGL approach is a very practical focused approach which
engages our people in business specific challenges
and actions. The framework is based on developing three key
attitudes needed to achieve excellence in learning:
•	 ‘Do-Learn-Do’ – is about learning through action;
•	 ‘Connect-to-Learn’ – which goes beyond team working
and looks to the value which can result from collective
contributions and networks; and
•	 ‘Techno Fluent’ – to integrate technology in a purposeful
way as necessary in both learning and in order to solve the
challenges of our clients.
Recognizing that our people learn in different ways, the
learning and development approach is flexible to cater for all.

34

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

Virtual Learning

In order to reach as many people any time and anywhere,
Capgemini offers our people a wide range of virtual learning
opportunities:
•	 E-learning modules offer self paced, web based learning
through courses devised as part of the Capgemini Global
Curriculum;
•	 Virtual Classroom led by an expert instructor via web
conferencing, allowing our people to come together virtually
in six-week courses;
•	 Facilitated virtual learning journeys (FVLJs) combine
a mixture of asynchronous (self learning at a person’s own
pace) and synchronous (instructor led) interventions; and
•	 Virtual Campus (interactive virtual training environment)
games, online books and assignments.
Our virtual learning journeys have resulted in a number of
benefits including:
•	 The engagement and support of the learner throughout the
program to ensure maximum certification success;
•	 An ability to present a global program allowing a broad
reach, catering for a range of experiences;
•	 Minimal content development;
•	 An increase in speed-to-market of skills enabling more
efficient client support;
•	 Availability of repeatable programs through the University;
•	 Reduction in travel expenses and associated emissions;
and
•	 Flexibility in accommodating learning within a participant’s
delivery schedule.
The Group’s online learning management system,
MyLearning, is open to all employees for informal, just-intime learning and for structured learning events. MyLearning
contains all the Group programs and, for many regions, local
curricula. In 2015, to deliver a modern digital-age learning
experience for all Capgemini Group employees, we invested
in a content and user experience enhancement upgrade of
the MyLearning core platform. In addition, we implemented
interactive search and filtering across the entire offering
of the global curriculum. Our learning content can now be
found and accessed anywhere and anytime, also through
mobile devices.
In 2015, Capgemini also introduced the use of MOOCs
(massive online open courses) and Capgemini University
released 77 new courses and 124 new virtual classroom
sessions, in addition to new content coming from the Group’s
alliance partners as well as Skillsoft.

Les Fontaines and Campus Learning Events

International learning events for talented people, within key communities, are also organized at our Group’s world-class campus,
in Les Fontaines, Paris, France. This facility is highly sustainable with a focus on energy efficiency and waste reduction. In 2014,
the campus had its European Ecolabel renewed. International Campus Learning Events are a powerful delivery channel to
align, develop and deploy content in an accelerated manner. New or existing content is delivered in a consistent manner, which
is then cascaded back to the regions and countries. Additionally, these events are an effective way to align and reinforce the
engagement of our talented people within the Group, their Business Units, and their communities. These events align people
to the Group ambitions, create a Group spirit and accelerate the deployment of key skills and content to our clients.
All International Campus Learning Events organized by Our University are positioned as a tool for alignment and acceleration
to achieve the Group’s ambitions.

Local Learning

The remainder of our learning through University learning programs is delivered locally by University Qualified facilitators (UQF).
Key metrics
In 2015, 96% of our workforce (excluding IGATE) took part in training schemes as part of the training path defined by the Group,
using various channels. This represents a 7.6% rise when compared to 2014 and equates to 5.19 million training hours.
The volume of training provided by the University was 3.3 million hours, representing 64% of total learning hours taken in the Group.
Close to 38,900 employees (an increase of11% vs. 2014) were trained at our Global Campus, Les Fontaines, in France or locally
in countries in which the Group is present, representing 1.17 million hours of training.
The Group continued to develop its virtual training courses, increasing by 19% over the year, or 2.45 million hours (some of these
hours are included in the 3.3 million University training figures). This channel now represents 47% of total training hours.
Graph showing how many of our people were trained

Learning & Development
96%
of our workforce took part
in a training scheme.
An increase of
7.6% against 2014.

Headcount Total

119,707

% unique Employee Trend

125,110

131,430

143,643

149,315

108,608

96%
95%

5.19 million
training hours completed.

38,900
Employees were trained
at our University
– Les Fontaines.

91%
78%

2010

85%

2011

88%

2012

2013

2014

2015

In H2 2015, more than 25,600 employees from IGATE have been trained
which represent nearly 1.2 million hours (and a total of 1.6 million training
hours full year)

35

6.	SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT
Capgemini’s commitment to supplier relationship is reflected in its comprehensive set of
guidelines on purchasing ethics, on the selection and management of suppliers.

6.1	 Purchasing Principles
At Capgemini we take seriously our commitment to be a responsible and ethical consumer. We acknowledge the
ability that we have to instigate positive change by using our buying power. In our purchasing activities, the Group
takes into account environmental issues, social impacts, human rights, and the fight against corruption. The
ten key principles of the United Nations Global Compact guide Capgemini’s activities throughout our business.
In other words, the Group is committed to ensuring that we only work with suppliers with ethical practices and
which respect human rights.
Our procurement procedures are based on the following principles:
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

treating suppliers fairly;
selecting suppliers based on value, performance, price and sustainability;
selecting suppliers in accordance with a justifiable and transparent process;
preserving the confidentiality of supplier information;
managing supplier risk;
ensuring supplier contracts have clauses relating to ethical and sustainable procurement; and
maintaining relationships with suppliers based wholly on competition.

Supplier diversity and equal opportunity is encouraged: we aim to allow qualified small and very small businesses
the opportunity to receive a share of the market. Our “eco-system” approach with major clients aims to foster this
and level the entry barrier where practical.
Our suppliers are expected to conduct their relationships with us and any of our clients, commercial partners
and other suppliers in a fair and ethical way and in compliance with our core principles of sustainability. These
principles apply both to the products and services provided, the suppliers’ activities and, where appropriate,
to their downstream supply chains.
Contractors’ and suppliers’ staff are expected to work according to the same Corporate Responsibility
& Sustainability criteria as our own employees; in tandem, we apply the same health and safety and diversity
criteria to contractors and suppliers as to our own employees.

36

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

6.2	 Our Ethics & Sustainable Procurement Principles
In 2015, Capgemini has developed its “Supplier Standards of Conduct & Compliance Management Requirements”. This
document regroups all of the above principles and also reminds employees and suppliers that Capgemini operates to a
“Purchase Order Mandatory” policy. All suppliers are requested to agree to the principles that are set out in this document prior
to working with us. Should a supplier fail to respect these ethical and sustainability guidelines, Capgemini is then entitled to
terminate the contract with the supplier.
“Capgemini Supplier Standards of Conduct & Compliance Management Requirements” document is available here:
•	https://www.capgemini.com/resources/capgemini-supplier-standards-of-conduct-compliance-management-requirements
Other reference documents and actions can be found at the following addresses:
•	 for ethics: http://www.capgemini.com/resources/our-ethics-for-you;
•	 for CR&S and sustainability with SMEs: http://www.uk.capgemini.com/about/corporate-responsibility/business-information-forsmall-medium-enterprises.
Furthermore, our suppliers have the opportunity to notify us of any known or suspected improper behavior in their
dealings with Capgemini or by Capgemini employees or agents, by sending a message to the following email address:
Supplierstandardsofconduct@capgemini.com which is accessed only by our Group Chief Procurement Officer and Chief Ethics
& Compliance Officer.
In 2015, Group purchases from its top one hundred and top ten suppliers totalled respectively €1,274 million and €478 million.
The number one, top five and top ten suppliers represented 3%, 12% and 17% of Group spend, respectively. In 2016,
Capgemini will further roll out our Supplier Relationship Management (“SRM”) approach with a clear focus on strengthening
governance and performance management with top partners and suppliers.

€ 478 million
Top 10 Suppliers

€1,274 million
Top 100 Suppliers

37

7.	 CLIENT SERVICES
We are dedicated to developing profitable and sustainable business by working with our
clients to deliver value and innovation through our skills and expertise.
Our clients benefit from our understanding of sustainability and our world-renowned business
transformation capabilities. We deliver long-lasting value with tangible results. We take time
to talk to our clients and make certain that their views are taken into account, and that where
possible CR&S considerations are embedded into our service offerings.

2015 Highlights:
Our Merlin Data center in the UK achieved a PUE
(Power Usage Effectiveness) ratio of 1.09

38

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

7.1	 Enabling client transformation
Clients are increasingly expecting their service providers to help them address their own sustainability challenges, for example,
not only providing the most efficient business solutions but minimizing and avoiding detrimental impacts to the environment,
communities and society in the process. As a provider of business transformation and consultancy services for our clients, we
believe that we are well positioned to help with such challenges.
Specifically, as an IT service provider and consultancy we have the opportunity to help clients reduce their own carbon footprint
and wider sustainability impacts through the advice that we offer and the solutions that we design and deliver. Capgemini also
recognizes that operational efficiency is a key driver in ensuring longevity for our clients, a driver that is often complemented by
reduced carbon emissions.

7.2	 Utilities to Energy Services (U2ES) Transformation
Climate change is now a major driver of energy policy around the world. Many countries are taking action to mitigate climate
change and prevent detrimental environmental impacts. As a result, utilities are faced with evaluating the long-term impact of
reducing dependence on fossil fuels.
The rise in availability, reliability and efficiency of renewable energy has made it possible for utility customers to significantly
reduce their reliance on energy from traditional suppliers. Coupled with disruptive technologies such as “The Internet of Things”,
Big Data and Data Analytics, intelligent battery technologies and mobile applications, the way customers interact with services
and the way in which they are provided are being transformed.
New technology is transforming factories, homes and offices around the world. New Wi-Fi enabled smart LED lighting and
thermostats are enabling businesses and residences to be more energy efficient. Internet connected security cameras are
making customers more secure and sensors attached to everything — HVAC, furnaces, hot water heaters, presses, mills
and lathes to name just a few — are increasing equipment performance. Conference rooms are becoming smarter by adding
intelligent lighting, occupancy sensors and software apps that show when a conference room is in use, whether the lights are on
or off and what the temperature and humidity is.
Distributed energy sources are carefully monitored, power generated, consumed and tracked within a facility and energy
efficiency optimized. New data, data analytics and trends analytics capabilities allow all of these things to be constantly
monitored and performance improvements made. With these changes come opportunities. Today’s utilities can embrace
the forces revolutionizing the utility industry to mitigate climate change, defend against greater competition, offer new and
innovative services to their existing customers, and greatly improve their operations or cost to serve. But to do this requires
a transformation from utility company to being an energy partner as an energy services company. We call this U2ES
Transformation – transformation from a utility company into an energy services company.
At Capgemini we help our clients to shape a future position in markets, define a transformation strategy, prioritize specific
needs, provide the right technologies and business partners to implement that transformation and develop new operational and
business models. Our approach is value based, meaning Capgemini is committed to delivering proven benefits across the value
chain: top line, bottom line and related KPIs.
With our industry knowledge, a team of experts will work with leaders within our clients’ business to provide:
•	 An upfront assessment of opportunities and a business case supporting a transformation;
•	 A more detailed roadmap and business case (four to six weeks engagement) to shape the transformation with a clear
Capgemini commitment on your results; and
•	 Delivery of swift and sustainable results.

Further information can be found at https://www.capgemini.com/utilities/u2es-transformation

39

7.3	 Smart Energy Services
We provide
Smart metering
services to

75+
utility companies.
Representing

113 million
customers
and over

23 million
smart meters
worldwide

Capgemini’s Smart Energy Services (SES) provides the full spectrum of smart
metering and smart grid solutions through leveraging best practices developed
over the last 12 years working alongside the world’s leading utilities. As a
result of following this strategy, investing and focusing in SES, Capgemini has
established itself as one of the leaders among global consulting and technology
firms in the advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) market.
We have provided smart energy services to over 75 global utility clients
representing 113 million metered customers actively engaged in smart energy
programs and directly manage mass deployment programs for over 23 million
smart meters worldwide.
Our Smart Energy Services Platform (SESP) is used to support mass
deployments and ongoing meter operations for over 7.5 million meters
globally.
Capgemini has an established global network of Smart Energy Centres of
Excellence (COE). These COE’s provide leading innovation, content, process,
and tools to support our smart energy programs. Our centres also provide
leading industrialized services for integration, deployment, meter operations,
network operations and solution architecture across multiple clients.
http://www.capgemini.com/utilities/smart-energy-services

7.4	 Merlin Data Center
Forming a part of our portfolio of data centers, our Merlin data center continues to operate as one of the most sustainable data
centers in the world. Based on state-of-the-art technology, Merlin was opened in the UK in 2010 to ensure clients’ systems are run
as efficiently as possible with reduced emissions (compared with their own in-house systems). Sustainability has been at the heart
of the project from the selection of its location, through its design and construction, to the day-to-day operations of the site.
Committed to maximizing the resource efficiency of our existing facilities, Capgemini has, for some time, been investing heavily in
improving the power efficiency of our data centers, including:
•	 sourcing renewable energy;
•	 converting AC mains power supply to DC;
•	 installing energy-efficient lighting and moving to lights-out operation; and
•	 monitoring temperature set points and making adjustments as required to maintain an optimal power-to- processing ratio.
Among Merlin’s key sustainability achievements are:
•	 a PUE (Power Usage Effectiveness) ratio of 1.09, which means significant power savings when compared to an “industry
average” data center;
•	 a cooling system that delivers 80% savings in running costs and produces up to 50% less carbon emissions than traditional
data center cooling solutions; and
•	 the elimination of batteries in the Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) thanks to the application of innovative flywheel
technology.
Since opening in 2010, Merlin has won the Data Centre Dynamics Leaders’ Green Data Centre Award (2010) and the Uptime
Institute’s Green IT Award for Data Center Design (2011). It was also a runner up in The Guardian’s 2011 Sustainable Business
Awards, and a finalist in the 2011 Business Green Leader’s awards. In 2014 it won the EU Institute for Energy and Transport’s
2013 European Code of Conduct for Data Center Energy Efficiency Award.
Further information is available from:
https://www.capgemini.com/resources/a-closer-look-at-merlin

40

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

Appendices
Appendix A: Environmental Performance Data

Scope and Metric

Energy
Use (MWh)

Scope 1 Emissions

Scope 2 Emissions

(t CO2e)
Country

Energy

Gas

(t CO2e)

Diesel/
Gas Oil

(All
sources)

Data
Center
Electricity

Office
Electricity

Office
Cooling

Scope 3
Emissions

Total
Energy
Emissions

(t CO2e)

(t CO2e)

Electricity
Urban
Heating

Electricity

Total
Energy
Emissions

T&D
Losses

India – Capgemini & Sogeti

76,993

N/A

2,131

N/A

56,811

N/A

N/A

12,594

71,536

France – Capgemini, Sogeti & Prosodie

87,730

250

40

2,776

2,264

N/A

64

442

5,835

UK – Capgemini, incl FS &Sogeti

67,201

890

7

22,016

6,802

N/A

N/A

2,379

32,094

Netherlands

21,309

124

16

5,999

2,183

N/A

14

345

8,681

North America

35,348

11

88

7,820

7,358

N/A

N/A

1,113

16,390

6,690

N/A

N/A

667

430

N/A

N/A

98

1,195

USA – Capgemini & Sogeti

Canada

28,658

11

88

7,152

6,927

N/A

N/A

1,015

15,195

Total Largest operations

288,581

1,275

2,282

38,611

75,418

N/A

78

16,873

134,537

Belgium – Capgemini & Sogeti

554

40

N/A

N/A

63

N/A

N/A

3

107

Czech Republic

232

N/A

N/A

N/A

21

N/A

44

2

67

Denmark – Capgemini

123

N/A

N/A

N/A

36

N/A

N/A

3

39

Finland – Capgemini
Germany – Capgemini & Sogeti
Ireland – Sogeti
Italy

9,949

N/A

27

1,400

231

N/A

294

59

2,012

13,052

330

N/A

3,091

1,663

N/A

266

222

5,572

78

N/A

N/A

N/A

33

N/A

N/A

3

36

3,543

200

N/A

661

319

N/A

N/A

69

1,250

Luxembourg Sogeti

196

N/A

N/A

N/A

77

N/A

N/A

1

78

Norway Capgemini

1,053

N/A

N/A

N/A

11

N/A

53

1

65

11,946

237

N/A

N/A

6,938

N/A

380

616

8,170

881

32

N/A

N/A

159

17

59

27

294

Spain – Capgemini & Sogeti

5,665

27

N/A

N/A

1,596

N/A

N/A

170

1,793

Sweden – Capgemini & Sogeti

3,520

N/A

N/A

4

36

34

189

3

266

270

Not
Available

N/A

6

3

N/A

N/A

1

9

Other Europe

51,062

866

27

5,161

11,187

51

1,284

1,180

19,756

Brazil

10,328

1

13

137

575

N/A

N/A

142

868

1,205

N/A

N/A

N/A

222

N/A

N/A

42

264

199

N/A

N/A

6

83

N/A

N/A

17

106

11,733

1

13

143

880

N/A

N/A

201

1,238

4,607

N/A

N/A

505

2,961

N/A

N/A

243

3,710

Philippines

531

N/A

N/A

N/A

264

N/A

N/A

37

302

Vietnam

199

N/A

N/A

N/A

94

N/A

N/A

14

108

Australia Capgemini (including BPO)

551

N/A

N/A

N/A

448

N/A

N/A

27

475

2,072

N/A

N/A

N/A

1,206

N/A

N/A

175

1,380

Poland
Romania

Switzerland – Capgemini & Sogeti

Guatemala
Mexico
Total Latin America
China Capgemini (including FS and
BPO)

Morocco
Total Other Regions
Total Reported Countries
Total Non Reported Countries
Grand total

7,960

N/A

N/A

505

4,973

N/A

N/A

496

5,975

359,335

2,141

2,322

44,421

92,459

51

1,362

18,750

161,506

4,323

26

28

534

1,112

1

16

226

1,943

363,658

2,167

2,350

44,955

93,571

52

1,378

18,976

163,449

41

F-Gas
Scope and Metric

Country

India – Capgemini & Sogeti
France – Capgemini, Sogeti & Prosodie
UK – Capgemini, Aspire, FS, Sogeti
Netherlands

Travel

Waste Generated
(non-hazardous)

Scope 1
Scope 3
Emissions Emissions

Weight

Water

Total Emissions

Scope 3
Water Use
Scope 3
Emissions
Emissions
(t CO2e)

(m3)

Total Emissions

(t CO2e)

(t CO2e)

(in Tons)

Total
F-Gas
Emissions

Total
Business
Travel
Emissions

Total
Waste

(t CO2e)

(t CO2e)

645

38,904

682

55

511,863

539

111,679

113,025

-1.19%

Not
Available

26,846

290

6

70,682

74

32,762

30,443

7.62%

352

13,309

256

7

65,116

69

45,831

52,315

-12.39%

Not
Available

26,308

189

7

20,725

22

35,018

40,179

-12.84%

Total
Water Use
Total
2015 Total 2014 Total % Change
Waste
Water
Emissions Emissions from 2014
Emissions
Emissions

North America

N/A

35,207

472

43

14,686

15

51,656

49,123

5.15%

Canada

N/A

1,339

90

8

2,027

2

2,545

2,623

-2.97%

USA – Capgemini & Sogeti

N/A

33,868

382

35

12,659

13

49,110

46,500

5.61%

Total Largest operations

996

140,575

1,890

119

683,072

719

276,945

285,085

-2.86%

Not
Available

5,573

19

1

851

1

5,682

5,704

-0.38%

Belgium – Capgemini & Sogeti

50

82

12

1

6

0

200

215

-6.89%

Denmark – Capgemini

Czech Republic

N/A

219

42

1

Not
Available

Not
Available

259

368

-29.70%

Finland – Capgemini

N/A

406

54

3

210

0

2,421

2,576

-6.03%

Not
Available

9,322

211

20

6,731

7

14,920

14,529

2.69%

N/A

22

0

0

Not
Available

Not
Available

58

81

-28.57%

Not
Available

3,050

75

7

52,838

56

4,363

4,609

-5.35%

Luxembourg Sogeti

N/A

2,748

7

1

Not
Available

Not
Available

2,827

2,920

-3.18%

Norway Capgemini

N/A

499

33

2

902

1

568

661

-14.06%

Poland

N/A

2,674

386

30

27,462

29

10,902

10,229

6.59%

Not
Available

105

0

0

2,190

2

401

317

26.55%

N/A

1,899

226

18

14,707

15

3,725

3,104

20.02%

Sweden – Capgemini & Sogeti

372

2,554

110

8

890

1

3,201

3,884

-17.57%

Switzerland – Capgemini & Sogeti

N/A

243

5

0

3

0

253

173

46.37%

Total Other Europe

422

29,397

1,181

92

106,791

112

49,779

49,368

0.83%
-10.72%

Germany – Capgemini & Sogeti
Ireland – Sogeti
Italy

Romania
Spain – Capgemini & Sogeti

20

2,762

36

1

21

0

3,651

4,089

Guatemala

Brazil

N/A

380

51

5

10,470

11

660

609

8.35%

Mexico

N/A

393

9

1

612

1

501

328

52.54%

20

3,535

96

6

11,104

12

4,811

5,026

-4.28%

China – Capgemini, FS & BPO

N/A

3,593

52

5

19,552

21

7,328

7,622

-3.85%

Philippines

N/A

57

11

0

1,631

2

361

404

-10.59%

Total Latin America

Vietnam

N/A

83

1

0

63

0

191

195

-2.27%

Australia Capgemini (including BPO)

N/A

736

Not
Available

Not
Available

12,048

13

1,224

2,408

-49.16%

Morocco

N/A

108

12

1

6,936

7

1,497

1,156

29.56%
-10.04%

Total Other Regions
Reported Countries
Total Non Reported Countries
Grand Total

42

N/A

4,578

76

6

40,230

42

10,602

11,785

1,438

178,084

3,242

223

841,196

885

342,138

351,264

-2.60%

17

2,142

39

3

10,120

11

4,116

8,928

-53.89%

1,456

180,227

3,281

226

851,316

896

346,254

360,191

-3.87%

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

Notes
-	 Data included in the tables is for the reporting period January to December 2015 (unless otherwise indicated)
-	 Data included in the tables does not include IGATE.
-	 The non reporting country emissions have been estimated based on the average tons of carbon per person (based on average headcount).
	 The headcount associated with the non reporting countries has been calculated by deducting the total average headcount of the listed reporting
	 countries from the Group total average headcount for both 2014 and 2015. The 50% reduction in non reporting country emissions in 2015 when
	 compared to 2014 is as a direct result of a 51% fall in the average headcount associated with the same.
-	 Table key: N/A = Not Applicable where data sources are not applicable and Not Available, which denotes areas where data is assumed to exist but
	 was not available for the purposes of this report.
-	 “Scope” is a reporting term from Greenhouse Gas Protocol, which is used in carbon accounting to categorize emissions reported according to the
	 level of control a company has over an emissions source.
-	 All emission sources: With the exception of hotel nights (mentioned below), emissions have been calculated using the conversion factors and
	 methodology recommended by the DEFRA: https://www.gov.uk/measuring-and-reporting-environmental-impacts-guidance-for- businesses.
-	 Energy: For all countries, a location-based emission factor has been applied to Scope 2 emissions from purchased electricity.
-	 Energy: Given the nature of our business, many of Capgemini’s offices have large server rooms. These are not considered to be data centers but
	 their presence should be taken into consideration when comparing the energy usage of our offices against those in other sectors.
-	 Energy: T&D losses refers to electricity transmission and distribution grid losses (the energy loss that occurs in getting the electricity from the power
	 plant to our facilities). During 2015, the scope of our carbon accounting was improved to include a calculation of emissions from T&D Losses for all
	countries.
-	 Energy: For the UK, electricity data for two offices has been estimated, one based on available data for that site from 2014 and the other based on
	 2013 electricity usage at a similar site in a similar location.
-	 Energy: For Canada, electricity usage is calculated based on the amount paid at the start of each year.
-	 Energy: Diesel for India in 2014 was updated following a correction received in 2015.
-	 F-Gas: F-gas emissions reported for 2014 were overestimated for some entities due to the inclusion of F-gases not covered by the Kyoto Protocol.
	 2014 F-gas emissions have therefore been restated. Although they are not included in the reported data, the emissions relating to the gases not
	 covered by the protocol are still captured with a value of just under 607 tCO2e.
-	 Travel: Emission factors as produced by the Carbon Neutral Company have been used to calculate the emissions associated with hotel nights in all
	 countries. It was identified during the external Grenelle II audit in 2012, that these factors, when applied outside the UK, may be too high with the
	 result that the figures presented above are likely to be higher than reality. As more appropriate emission factors could not be obtained at the time,
	 the figures have been reported as calculated. However, new lower factors have been developed to be applied during 2016.
-	 Travel: In the Netherlands and Belgium, emissions data associated with travel include personal car use as well as business mileage as it cannot be
	separated.
-	 Travel: 2014 Car and Rail data for Canada has been restated using the expense system in place, rather than the travel agent data which was found
	 to be a more accurate repository of data
-	 Waste: For the US and Canada, 2015 waste data is estimated based on 2012 invoices (received in 2013), with data adjusted to take into account
	 “Actual number of people in office” in 2015.
-	 Water: As recommended by DEFRA we calculate both emissions associated with water supply and emissions associated with water treatment.
As the volume of water being sent for treatment is unmetered it is assumed that the volume is the same as that being supplied.
-	 Water: For the US and Canada, 2015 water data for all facilities is estimated based on two invoices from 2015, with data adjusted to take into
	 account the ”area of office”. The same is done for 2014 data. (Water is charged based on office area irrespective of headcount).

43

Appendix B: Community Investment and Donations
Summary of donations made
Countries
India

Donations

Programs

1,293,819 € Hope foundation (99k€), Sri Sri Ravishankar Vidya Mandir Trust (67k€), Saahas (61k€),
Foundation for Excellence India Trust (81k€), Naasscom foundation (68k€), Anirban rural
welfare society (52k€)..., 432k€ from iGate.

France

260,715 € Passeport Avenir (50k€), Emmaus connect (50k€), Programme booster (20k€), Mission
Handicap (120k€)

UK & Ireland

164,847 € The Prince’s Trust Membership (83.5k), CIAs awarded (35k€), Naandi (18k€)

North America

159,502 € Columbus Citizens Foundation (19k€), American India foundation (19k€), IICF Insurance
Industry Charitable Foundation (11k€), TM Charity Classic by Vail Place (11k€),
United Way (21k€)..

Benelux
Largest operations sub-total

58,048 € St. Opkikker (47.5k€)
1,936,932 €

Nordic countries

117,891 € Naandi 110k€

Latam

49,293 € Fondo Unido (33k€), Foundation Incluyeme (13k€)

South Europe

126,925 € Foundation Adecco (67k€), Save the Children (20k€), Cadin (24k€)

Germany and Central Europe

11,126 € Managers of the Future Foundation (6k€), Jasiek Mela Foundation „Poza Horozyonty”
(„Beyond Horizons”) (3k€)

Asia Pacific

8,579 € Smile Foundation: Reindeer Park Fund Raising (3k€), Naandi (2k€)

TOTAL

2,250,746 €

The high increase in donations in 2015 is mostly due to India where the government rules changed and asked to all
companies to spend 2% of their profit for Corporate Social Responsibility related activities every year.

44

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

Appendix C: Global Diversity & Inclusion Charter

Capgemini’s success, brand identity and client experience are determined by the talented people who work for us. We believe
that people perform better when they are empowered to be their authentic self at work and feel included in the way we approach
how we work to deliver services to our clients. Cultivating an inclusive environment and ensuring that every voice of Capgemini is
heard and considered, maximizes our capability to win and deliver business and makes Capgemini a great place to work.
Our approach to Diveristy & inclusion is formalized within our Group Diversity and Inclusion Charter which was refreshed in 2014
and outlines our commitment to:
•	 engage with our clients, partners and suppliers to ensure there is understanding and alignment to our values, diversity and
inclusion commitments and clear expectations;
•	 recruit and retain a talented and diverse workforce to deliver innovative, world-class solutions for our clients;
•	 foster an inclusive workplace environment that offers every employee the opportunity for a successful career;
•	 engage employees in the diversity and inclusion agenda through communication, awareness, and education to build cultural
competencies, and career development opportunities;
•	 continually review and integrate employee feedback to implement programs that provide employee engagement opportunities
and drive leadership accountability;
•	 design, implement and regularly review and update policies to ensure that we, as an organization, are embracing diversity,
cultivating inclusion, and responding to our employees’ needs;
•	 support and leverage local and global networks across the Group business operations for employees and led by employees
building communities to drive inclusion across culture, commerce, career, and community;
•	 encourage and support our employees to consider diversity and inclusion in our everyday business decisions (e.g.
procurement, building a team, initiative sponsorship);
•	 integrate diversity and inclusion principles into Capgemini’s business systems and activities based on five key drivers:
workplace, workforce, marketplace, community, and executive engagement across the Group;
•	 comply with all applicable laws concerning diversity and inclusion supported through enabling employees to obtain guidance
or report concerns on compliance and misconduct;
•	 report our progress, best practices and results across the Group both internally and externally based on our inclusion and
diversity success measures;
•	 enhance Capgemini’s external employer brand through the promotion of our diversity and inclusion achievements.
Our differences are a source of creativity, innovation and inspiration. Embracing diversity and inclusion equips us to reflect
today’s global marketplace in the communities where we operate, enables us to generate new ideas or anticipate market trends
as thought leaders in our chosen markets and supports us in better understanding the challenges of our clients, partners and
suppliers. We believe this will enhance the working experience of our people around the Group, create greater opportunities for
sustainable business and affirm Capgemini’s status as a global employer of choice.

45

Appendix D: Commitments, Awards and Recognitions

We have stated our commitment to Corporate Responsibility
& Sustainability in a number of areas:

A number of actions have also been taken in certain countries,
including:

•	 Capgemini has been a signatory to the UN Global Compact
since 2004. The member companies of this program
support/comply with ten principles in the areas of the
environment, human rights, labor rights, and the fight
against corruption;

•	 Capgemini France became a signatory of the “charte de
la diversité” in 2006 and the “charte de la banlieue 2.0”
in 2010;

•	 Capgemini supports the principles of the 1948 Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the fundamental
conventions of the International Labour Organization (ILO)
refusing the use of forced labor or child labor;
•	 Capgemini supports the OECD guidelines for multinational
enterprises;
•	 Capgemini has been a signatory to the UN Global
Compact’s “Caring for Climate” initiative since its inception
in 2007;
•	 Capgemini has been a signatory to the Women’s
Empowerment Principles since their inception in 2011;
•	 Capgemini is a signatory of the 2010 Guadalajara ICT
Declaration on Transformative Low-carbon Solutions. This
document urged governments at the 2010 Cancun Summit
to use the power of ICT to make the transition to low
a carbon economy;
•	 In partnership with the GoodPlanet foundation, Capgemini
translated the 2011 Worldwatch Institute Report into French; and
•	 In 2015, Capgemini Chairman and CEO Paul Hermelin
signed the Business Proposals for COP 21 in support of
the 21st session of the Conference of the Parties to the
UN Framework Convention on Climate Change.

•	 Capgemini France has been signatory to the Charter
“enterprises et quartiers” in 2013;
•	 Capgemini France has been signatory to the “Charte de
la parentalité” in 2011;
•	 Capgemini France has been signatory to the “Charte de
l’apprentissage” in 2011;
•	 Capgemini UK is also a signatory of a series of six and the
Trillion Ton Communique in 2014 communiqués on Climate
Change organized by the Prince of Wales’s Corporate
Leaders’ Group on Climate Change. They are the Climate
Change (2012), Cancun (2010), Copenhagen (2009), Poznan
(2008), and Bali (2007) communiqués;
•	 Capgemini UK has registered its support for the Think Act
Report initiative, a voluntary framework developed by the
UK Government with the aim of promoting gender equality
within the workplace;
•	 Capgemini Germany signed the “Charta der Vielfalt“
(the Diversity Charter) in October 2014;
•	 Capgemini NL is signatory of the Talent to the Top Charter
(gender diversity) since 2009;
•	 Capgemini NL committed to the Multiple Year Agreement
program in 2009. This is public private collaboration
program is aiming for more effective and efficient
energy use;
•	 Capgemini NL committed to the Lean & Green Personal
Mobility Program in 2013; and
•	 Capgemini NL achieved the highest level (5) on the Dutch
CO2 Performance ladder (governed by SKAO) following
external audit in December 2015.

46

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2015/2016

As a result of our on-going commitment to Corporate
Responsibility & Sustainability, in 2015 Capgemini was:
•	 once again recognized as one of the World’s Most Ethical
Companies in 2015 by the Ethisphere Institute, a leading
international think tank specializing in research on ethical
business practices;
•	 included again in the FTSE4Good;
•	 reconfirmed as a constituent of the Ethibel Sustainability
Index (ESI) Excellence Europe;
•	 recognized in the European Economic Congress’ 2015
Responsible Companies Ranking for its quality
management of CR&S; given 36th place overall and 2nd
place in the Telecommunications, technology, media and
entertainment sector;
•	 Capgemini UK awarded with the Positive about Disabled
People Two Ticks Accreditation from Business in the
Community for the seventh year running;
•	 named within the annual Corporate 101 list by MBN USA
Magazine (Minority Business Network), as representing the
‘Most Admired Companies’ in Supplier Diversity in
Capgemini North America;

•	 named as a winner in the Golden Peacock Awards for
Sustainability, for managing natural resources and
conserving electricity and water in Capgemini India;
•	 awarded the Eco Corporate of the Year Award (Services
category) in the Yes Bank Natural capital Awards which
reward and showcase organizations dedicated to
environmental stewardship. The award was in recognition
of Capgemini India’s Smart Energy Management Solution
which was deployed across major Capgemini India
locations in 2014;
•	 named as amongst Canada’s Best Diversity Employers in
2015 and 2016;
•	 successful in achieving ISO 14001 certification covering
Capgemini North America, Sweden and Capgemini France
(extending coverage to include operations in eleven
countries) (bringing the total coverage to 76% of our Group
headcount);
•	 named as a Rated Supplier on the Chartered Institute of
Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) Sustainability Index (CSI);
•	 awarded a Diamond for Gender Diversity Performance in
Capgemini Netherlands (May 2015) by the Monitor Talent
to the Top.

47

More information about our services,
offices and research is available at www.capgemini.com

About Capgemini
With more than 180,000 people in over 40 countries, Capgemini
is one of the world’s foremost providers of consulting, technology
and outsourcing services. The Group reported 2015 global
revenues of EUR 11.9 billion.
Together with its clients, Capgemini creates and delivers
business, technology and digital solutions that fit their needs,
enabling them to achieve innovation and competitiveness.
A deeply multicultural organization, Capgemini has developed its
own way of working, the Collaborative Business ExperienceTM,
and draws on Rightshore®, its worldwide delivery model.
Learn more about us at www.capgemini.com.
 
Rightshore® is a trademark belonging to Capgemini
The information contained in this document is proprietary.
©2016 Capgemini. All rights reserved. Rightshore ® is a trademark belonging to Capgemini.

