Corporate Responsibility &
Sustainability Review 2013

We are proud to be a
company with demonstrable
and externally accredited
strengths in corporate
responsibility and
sustainability. That said,
we are not complacent
and recognize that becoming
a more sustainable business
is a long journey – one to
which we are committed.
James Robey
Group Corporate Responsibility
& Sustainability Director

Executive Summary

Welcome to our 2013 Review in which we provide an overview of our
approach to Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability together with our
key 2012/13 highlights.
This last year has been another year of continued progress
which has also seen us refocus our approach under four
strategic dimensions:
•	Values & Ethics – providing the framework which underpins all
we do;
•	Environmental Sustainability – managing and reducing
environmental impacts;
•	Community Engagement – maximizing the positive impacts
we have on the communities in which we live and operate;
•	People Culture – ensuring that we are both a responsible and
inclusive company.
Running across all these dimensions remains our dedication to
our clients, and as such we continue to look for innovative ways
to further embed our sustainability values into the client services
we provide.
While much has been achieved in the past year, some of our
key achievements have been:
•	Further strengthening of our approach to environmental
sustainability with Spain becoming the latest of our countries
to achieve ISO14001 certification for its Environmental
Management System covering both Capgemini and Spain.
Operations in seven of our countries are now covered by this
international standard with further countries being currently
rolled out;
•	The development of an innovative Smart Energy Management
Solution (SEMS) that enabled a 10% reduction in energy use in
two Mumbai offices within two months and which is now being
rolled out internally as well as being offered to our clients;

•	Recognition for our community engagement approach, with
our Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) Centers in Poland
winning the European Outsourcing Awards in the CSR
category, and receiving the prestigious Community Mark
award from Business in the Community at a reception
attended by the Prime Minister David Cameron;
•	A new holistic approach to managing diversity being
deployed as part of our people culture approach in North
America including the roll-out of a new Leadership
Development Program aimed at all levels across the business
up to and including our Vice President community;
•	A strengthened approach to the governance of Corporate
Responsibility & Sustainability (CR&S), with the expansion of
our network of CR&S leaders to cover all our major territories
and over 90 per cent of the Group by headcount;
•	And finally the inaugural award by Capgemini Netherlands of
a new award which recognizes the client project which had
the most impact on the sustainability of our clients;
•	Recognition by the Ethisphere Institute of Capgemini being
one of the World’s Most Ethical Companies in 2013.
I hope you find our Annual Corporate Responsibility &
Sustainability Review useful. Further information about our
focus and progress can be found on our website at www.
capgemini.com/sustainability

James Robey
Group Corporate Responsibility
& Sustainability Director

3

Capgemini Headquarters, Paris, France.

4

Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Review 2013

Table of Contents
Introduction	6
Our Approach to Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability	
10

1. Values & Ethics	

1.1 Leadership & Values	
1.2 Group Ethics & Compliance Program	
1.3 Sustainable Procurement: Our Suppliers and Business Partners	

2. Environmental Sustainability	
2.1 Group Environmental Policy	
2.2 Management approach 	
2.3 Environmental Performance 	
2.4 Key Performance Indicators	

3. Community Engagement	

12

12
13
15

16

17
17
18
19

21

3.1 Our Global Initiatives	
3.2 Some of our National Initiatives	
3.3 Community Investment and Donations	

22
23
25

4 People demographics	

26

4.1 Professional Development	
4.2 Diversity & equal opportunity	
4.3 Work organization, health & well-being	
4.4 Social Dialog/Employee engagement	
4.5 Leadership	

5. Client Services	

27
27
28
29
30

32

3.1 Enabling Client Transformation	
3.2 Innovating for our Clients	
3.3 Client Satisfaction Approach	

32
33
34

Awards and Recognition	
Appendix A – Organizational Structure	
Appendix B – Additional People Data	
Appendix C – Additional Environmental Data	

35
36
37
46

5

Introduction

Being a responsible company has been at the heart of Capgemini’s values since we
were founded in 1967 by Serge Kampf. Our commitment to Corporate Responsibility
& Sustainability has endured for more than 45 years as we have grown to become
Europe’s largest IT services company, with over 130,000 employees operating in over
44 countries.
In 2013 we have strengthened our program by refocusing our approach under
four strategic dimensions: Environmental Sustainability; Community Engagement;
People Culture together with the Values & Ethics which underpin everything we do.
Furthermore we continue to look for innovative ways to embed sustainability into the
services we provide our clients.
We remain committed to going beyond our legislative obligations and talking with our
key stakeholders to ensure that we align our approach to their key expectations. Our
shareholders, for example, are increasingly asking us about our commitment across
various aspects of corporate responsibility and the wider sustainability agenda.
Interest covers aspects such as our policies regarding human rights and anticorruption to our focus and commitments on carbon reduction.
This report is dedicated to transparently sharing our progress to date, while setting out
our ambitions and plans for the future. Overall, we openly acknowledge that while we
have come a long way over the last 46 years, there is still much further to travel.

Paul Hermelin
Chairman and Group CEO

At Capgemini, we recognize that
issues such as resource scarcity,
energy security, climate change,
and demographic evolution
are also impacting our clients.
Consequently, we remain
committed to developing and
delivering innovative business
and IT solutions to support
our clients, enabling them to
adapt to the new realities of our
changing world.
6

Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Review 2013

Ownership and organizational structure
Non-French
institutional
shareholders

French
institutional
shareholders

Individual
shareholders

Board members
& Group
employees

Treasury
stock

54.2%

27.4%

7.0%

9.8%

1.6%

Cap Gemini S.A
Capgemini
Consulting
•	 Consulting 	
	Services

Capgemini
•	Technology
	Services
•	Outsourcing
	Services

Sogeti
•	Local
	Professional
	Services

Headquartered in Paris, France and
operating in over 44 countries with
over 130,000 employees, we have
established ourselves as one of the
top five IT services and consulting
companies worldwide and the largest
IT services company based in Europe.
Capgemini’s mission is to enable
our clients to transform and perform
through technology. Our vision is to lead
by providing clients with insights and
capabilities that boost their freedom to
achieve superior results.

Our ownership and operational
structure are shown in the diagram
above. There were no significant
changes in structure which affected our
approach to corporate responsibility and
sustainability during 2012 / 13 however,
the increase in share ownership of
directors and employees from 7.0 per
cent to 9.8 per cent between 2011
and 2012 highlights the success of our
Employee Share Ownership Program
(ESOP) and reflects the strength of our
shared values.

Capgemini offers cutting-edge
technological skills and consulting
expertise across all sectors and
geographies. With strong expertise
in its four businesses and in-depth
knowledge of six key business sectors,
the Group is increasingly regarded as
a leading provider by its many global
clients. They appreciate its innovative
approach, ability to partner with the
market’s top technology players, and
a global delivery model, Rightshore®,
which combines local (onshore)
resources with more distant (offshore)
specialist production centers.

In 2012, the Group achieved revenues
just over 10 billion euro, an increase
of 5.9% compared with 2011, and an
operating profit for the year of €601
million, bringing the operating margin
to 5.9% compared with 6.1% in 2011. A
breakdown of revenue by business area,
market sector and country is presented
in Appendix A.
76% of our people and the majority
of our data centers are located in
France, the Netherlands, North
America, India, Brazil and the UK. These
countries represent our most material
sustainability impact.

7

Benelux

8,81
United Kingdom
and Ireland

9,205

France

20,970
North America

9,702

Morocco

743

Latin America

9,261

Group Total

130,088

Number of team
members by region

Working Offshore

50,968

as at September 2013

Our approach to Corporate
Responsibility & Sustainability flows
from our corporate values, and we
are committed to responsible and
sustainable business practices,
delivering value to our stakeholders
who include: customers, shareholders,
investors, business partners, suppliers,
employees, the community, and
the environment.
In particular, the impacts, risks and
opportunities presented as a result
of climate change touch every part
of our business. Our services impact

8

the environment through our use of
energy and as a result of business
travel. Some of our operations, such
as our data center facilities and the
services run from them, remain at
risk from extreme weather events for
example. Our clients require, in many
circumstances, continuous service from
our data centers no matter the weather
conditions. We also recognize the
opportunity and potential opportunities
whereby ICT can be used to assist
our clients with their own climate
change challenges.

Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Review 2013

We have been supporting the principles
of the UN Global Compact Program
since 2004, signed up to the UN
Global Compact Caring for Climate
initiative in 2007 and the UN Women’s
Empowerment Principles in 2011. Our
management approach also supports
all international laws and regulations, in
particular the fundamental conventions
on labor standards of the International
Labor Organization, the principles
of the 1948 Universal Declaration of
Human Rights (where we refuse the
use of forced and child labor) and
the OECD guidelines for Multinational

x

12
Rest of Europe

21,664

Asia Pacific

Middle East, Africa
and UAE

25

3,977
India

45,729

Enterprises. We continue to increase the
proportion of our operations covered
by ISO14001 certification and are rolling
out globally a robust environmental and
social data measurement tool so we
can ensure that we can manage our
sustainability performance.
Our 2013 report, consequently provides
an overview of our approach and
performance within our refocused
approach covering: our Values and
Ethics, Environmental Sustainability,
Community Engagement, and our
People Culture.

This report is our second one produced
to the principles of the GRI standard
and covers data from the 2012 calendar
year combined with narrative relating
to progress throughout 2012 and 2013.
Due to our growing and ever changing
data baseline and to avoid confusion,
we have elected not to restate data
from previous reports. The policies
and principles described in this report
are applicable to our entire global
operations. While there continues to be
some limitations to data availability, all
available data has been included in the
following sections.

We intend that this report assists with an
increased stakeholder dialog at a Group
level to proactively refine future reports
to ensure the focus and materiality of
content is pertinent and applicable.

9

Our Approach to Corporate
Responsibility and Sustainability
Our Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability vision is ‘to be leaders
in sustainable excellence through a bold and influential approach,
positively impacting Capgemini’s future, our clients, society and
the planet.’ During 2013 we have refocused our approach under
four strategic dimensions covering Environmental Sustainability,
Community Engagement, People Culture and Client Services
underpinned by Values and Ethics. Additionally we are working to
look for innovative approaches to building sustainability into our client
service offers.
Our Sustainability Framework
Values & Ethics

It’s about who we are and the way we do business

10

Environmental
Sustainability

Community
Engagement

People
Culture

Client
Services

Our deep and measured
understanding of
environmental impact
enables us to manage
risk and reduce our
carbon footprint across
the Group.

We strive to have a
positive impact on the
communities in which we
live and operate.

We aim to be the
employer of choice for
people who wish to
flourish in a creative and
diverse environment.

Our clients benefit from
our comprehensive
understanding of
sustainability and our
world class business
transformation
capabilities.

Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Review 2013

Values & Ethics
It’s about who we are and the way we do business.
Built on a foundation of our seven core values, our code of ethics underpins our corporate culture
and permeates all of our business practices, procurement behaviors and employee welfare policies.

Environmental Sustainability
We have a deep and measured understanding of our impact on the environment.
We recognize that while we do not manufacture products, the business services we provide can still
impact the environment. We are working to reduce our environmental impacts from energy, business
travel and waste, while raising employee awareness on the critical issues of sustainable development.

Community Engagement
We strive to have a positive impact on the communities in which we live and operate.
As a major global employer, we work both locally, nationally and internationally with charities,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and local authorities around inclusivity and skills for
the future. Around the Group, we encourage the active involvement of our team members in
community development.

People Culture
We aim to be the employer of choice for people who wish to flourish in a creative and diverse
environment. Our focus is on the professional development and well-being of all our employees by
ensuring that both our business practices and our facilities empower our delivery excellence. We have a
culture whereby we respect and value the diversity and creativity of all our people.

Client Services
Our clients benefit from our deep understanding of sustainability and our world class
business transformation capabilities. We deliver long-lasting value with tangible results. We
take customer dialog and feedback very seriously, and look to embed Corporate Responsibility and
Sustainability considerations into our consulting, technology and outsourcing offers.

11

1. Values & Ethics
1.1 Leadership & Values
Since the creation of the Group in 1967, our culture and business
practices have been inspired and guided by our seven core values.
These principles drive us as a Group and also as individuals. They are at
the heart of our approach as an ethical and responsible company.
These values are more than just rules of behavior: they provide the basis for
our ethical approach and our principles. From them, we have carved out our
approach to responsibility and our ethical and sustainability culture: they are the
Group’s DNA. They demonstrate our belief in integrity and ethical behavior.
Our values are critical in respecting, defending and upholding the Group
as an ethical and responsible business and in protecting our reputation.

team spirit
trust

boldness

modesty

fun

honesty

freedom

HIGHLIGHT: MARCH 2013
Highlight:	  March	  2013,	  

	  	  

Capgemini is recognized as one of the World’s Most
Ethical Companies in 2013 by the Ethisphere Capgemini	  
Institute.has	  been	  recognized	  as	  one	  of	  the	  World’s	  Most	  Ethical	  
Companies	  in	  2013	  by	  the	  Ethisphere	  Institute.	  	  

At	  Capgemini	  we	  often	  state	  that	  we	  go	  beyond	  compliance	  and	  philanthropy	  within	  our	  

At Capgemini we often state that we go beyond
compliance
and
Corporate	  
Responsibility	  
&	  Sustainability	  programs	  and	  in	  2013	  our	  efforts	  were	  externally	  
recognised	  
by	  the	  research-­‐based	  
Ethisphere	  Institute.	  Ethisphere	  is	  dedicated	  to	  the	  creatio
philanthropy within our Corporate Responsibility
& Sustainability
programs
advancement	  and	  sharing	  of	  best	  practices	  in	  business	  ethics,	  corporate	  social	  responsibility,
and in 2013 our efforts were externally recognized
by theand	  research-based
anti-­‐corruption	  
sustainability.	  	  
Ethisphere Institute. Ethisphere is dedicated to the creation advancement
and sharing of best practices in business ethics, corporate social
	  
responsibility, anti-corruption and sustainability.

12

Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Review 2013

1.2 Group Ethics & Compliance Program
The Group Ethics & Compliance Program was
launched in 2009 and established a network of
Ethics & Compliance Officers across the Group.
The objectives of the program are to:
•	Develop a sustainable ethical culture, which
reinforces integrity and leads to ethical behavior;
•	Strengthen knowledge and awareness of
international and national laws, and internal policies
applicable in the Group’s companies; and
•	Implement initiatives reinforcing prevention and
aiming at avoiding misconduct and breaches
in the field of ethics and compliance.
Managers across the Group are accountable in
their respective units for ethics, and for compliance
with the applicable laws and regulations.
The Chief Ethics & Compliance Officer (CECO) is
responsible for the Ethics & Compliance Program across
the Group. The Program and its achievements are
reviewed annually by the Group Ethics and Governance
Committee of the Board of Directors.General Counsels
across the Group have been appointed as local Ethics &
Compliance Officers. They are responsible for the Ethics
& Compliance Program within the geography under
their responsibility and work closely with the CECO.
As part of our Ethics & Compliance Program, we published
our Code of Business Ethics in 2010, our Anti-Corruption
Policy in 2011 and our Competition Laws Policy in 2012.
The Code of Business Ethics and its resulting policies have
received the collective and individual support of all the
members of the Capgemini’s Board, our Group Executive
Committee and the Group’s Vice-President community.

On publication in 2010, a hard copy of the Code of Business
Ethics was sent, together with a letter from the CEO, to
all Vice-Presidents (approximately 1,400 managers) for
their review and for signature of compliance. The Code is
available in 13 languages and we have rolled out a specific
e-learning module on the code which can be completed in
four languages. By the end of September 2013, more than
90,000 team members have completed this e-learning.
The Anti-Corruption Policy is also available in eight
languages with an accompanying e-learning module
available in four languages (with a fifth to be available
soon). At the end of September 2013, more than 42,000
team members had completed the e-learning.
The Competition Laws Policy is also available in eight
languages with an accompanying e-learning module
currently available in two languages (soon to be
available in five). At the end of September 2013, more
than 30,000 team members have completed this.
Furthermore, Capgemini has in place a dedicated procedure
for requesting advice and guidance and for raising concern.
The Raising Concern Procedure (RCP) is currently in operation
on a case-by-case basis in over 35 countries where the Group
operates, in accordance with the applicable legislation
To the best of our knowledge, we have not been the subject of
significant fines for non compliance with laws and regulations
concerning the provision of our services during the last year.

Ethics Week
Corresponding with the Group’s anniversary, a ‘Values & Ethics’ week was run across
Capgemini to promote and renew awareness of our ethical policies and the seven values
of the Group. In particular, the Group’s Chief Ethics & Compliance Officer took the
opportunity to highlight via a video image the importance of our compliance policies and
procedures by sharing information in social gatherings and on social media platforms.

13

Our Sustainable
Procurement Principles
1.	 Human Rights
2.	Respect for national, international,
regional and local applicable laws
3.	 No forced or compulsory labor
4.	 No child labor
5.	 Equality and diversity
6.	 Employee well-being
	 and development
7.	 Disciplinary practices
8.	 Freedom of association
9.	 Health and Safety
10.	 Confidentiality and
	 intellectual property
11.	Refusal of bribery and corruption
in business practices
12.	 Environmental impacts

14

Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Review 2013

1.3 Sustainable Procurement: Our
Suppliers and Business Partners
With supply chains coming under ever greater scrutiny,
Capgemini has developed Sustainable and Ethical
Procurement guidelines. We expect our suppliers and
business partners to fully comply with all applicable legislation
for the products and / or services they provide, and to respect
appropriate ethical policies and human rights. Our contracts
with our suppliers reflect this approach. Should a supplier fail to
respect these sustainable procurement and ethical guidelines,
Capgemini is entitled to terminate the contract.
In all of our purchasing activities, we pay attention to social
impacts and human rights, environmental impacts, antibribery and corruption. The ten key principles of the United
Nations Global Compact underpin our activities throughout our
business.

Sustainable Procurement in Practice

Capgemini continues to implement its Sustainable Procurement
in Partnership project. This reviews every category of goods
and services procured from suppliers, in order to identify
key areas of sustainability risk and related opportunities for
improvement. Risk in this context refers to whether the product
or service being procured has the potential to make a material
impact on our sustainability performance and commitments
(specifically in the areas of Health and Safety; Anti bribery and
Ethical Trading); or whether it is subject to specific legislation,
particularly environmental legislation.

Capgemini was awarded the Prime Supplier of the Year
Award by global client The Coca-Cola Company at the
2013 Partners in Promise Awards Celebration in Atlanta,
USA. The award recognizes suppliers who have made
outstanding contributions with internal teams to move
business initiatives forward while championing supplier
diversity. Capgemini has helped Coca-Cola increase
its diversity procurement in the areas of IT, BPO, and
business consulting for more than 20 years.

The project encompasses:
•	a review of our supplier base in terms of risk and extent of
expenditure;
•	a more detailed survey of prioritized suppliers to assess
supplier performance compared with sustainability
principles
•	if required, agreeing appropriate improvement activities with
prioritized suppliers; and
•	assessing all new suppliers who are required to complete a
sustainability questionnaire.
Capgemini also aims as far as possible to undertake all
procurement (real estate, equipment, business travel) in
accordance with its environmental policies and guidelines.
This has been embedded into standard contracts since
2007, with the option of terminating a contract in the case of
non-compliance.
In 2009, the Group’s Procurement Officers set up a program
to complete risk and expense assessments on all of our key
suppliers. The program has been implemented in our largest
countries between 2009 and 2012 supplier assessments
covered 88% of worldwide purchasing expenses. Some 4,293
suppliers were or are currently being analyzed. Following
this analysis, 215 suppliers have been delisted or reclassified
with an additional 222 suppliers participating in a resolution
program to bring them to the required standard.

“We are honored to be recognized by The Coca-Cola
Company with whom we share a core business value
of empowering a diverse workforce and supplier base
to deliver impactful business outcomes. Our growing
supplier diversity program has set a new standard for
responsible supply chain management and Capgemini
is committed to expanding its work with more diverse
suppliers to solve complex problems for our clients
around the globe.”said Paul Dickens, director, Supplier
Diversity and Engagement, Capgemini.

15

2. Environmental
Sustainability
Although Capgemini does not manufacture
products, we recognize that our services
and business activities still impact the
environment. We are, therefore, working to
reduce our environmental impacts as part
of our overall Corporate Responsibility &
Sustainability program, particularly focusing
on energy use, business travel and waste.
We are also committed to complying with
legal and other relevant requirements in force
within our operational geographies.
Capgemini believe that environmental sustainability is a driver of shareholder
value. Taking steps to go beyond simple environmental compliance,
provides us with opportunities to support clients with new service offerings
as well as to improve our efficiency and ultimately lower operational costs.

Installation of bee hives at our Kleber office in
Paris, France, in conjunction with Ekodev for the
protection and preservation of bees in France.

16

Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Review 2013

2.1 Group Environmental Policy
Chairman and CEO Paul Hermelin signed our Group Environment Policy in 2011 which sets out the expectations for all countries.
This policy statement (see Appendix C) reinforces our commitment to environmental compliance and the continual improvement of
environmental performance specifically in the areas of Energy, Business Travel and Waste.

2.2 Management approach
ISO 14001 certified Environmental Management Systems are in place in the UK, the Netherlands, France, Belgium, Portugal, Brazil
and Spain. The implementation of the Group Environment Policy will facilitate activities within the remaining countries to address
ISO14001 requirements.
Across the Group, our key material environmental impacts are set out in the table below:
Key environmental
aspects

Aspects and impacts applicable to the Capgemini business

Energy

Our main environmental impact comes from the consumption of electricity, gas and oil to light, heat
and power to our offices and data centers.
Data processing centers are particularly energy intensive due to the high level of IT equipment to
be housed, powered and cooled. As an example, adound 78% of the electricity we use in our UK
operations is consumed by the data processing centers alone.

Travel

The business journeys we undertake, including journeys by road, rail, air and stays in hotels all
consume fossil fuels, contributing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and impacting climate change.
This is a major challenge for our industry, whose business relies on the mobility of their employees in
order to utilize their skills and experience in serving our customers worldwide.
We continue to take advantage of the opportunities created by technology such as videoconferencing, supported by virtual hosting services. We also introduced or improved some
collaborative tools to facilitate remote working and allow a greater flexibility. In many countries we
monitor the emissions from our car fleets, especially by setting emission limits or by promoting the
use of hybrid vehicles.

Waste management

Much of the waste that the Group produces is generated from office consumables and packaging.
Capgemini aims to minimize the amount of waste that is sent to landfill by providing recycling facilities
in key offices.
We also try to engage our people and work with key suppliers to reduce the overall amount of waste
in the business, generated by daily operations. We ensure that all electronic equipment is recylced in
accordance with local laws.

17

2.3
Environmental Performance
In order to drive improvements at Group level we are acutely
aware of the need for a robust baseline against which to
assess and set suitable targets and monitor progress. Whilst
not fully there yet, we continue to roll out a global carbon
accounting system to standardize data collection, monitoring
and management. Starting with the top five countries by
headcount, the system has been gradually expanding since
2012 and will contain raw data for 12 of our Group countries by
the end of 2013.

Whilst we have not yet set global carbon reduction targets, this
improved carbon accounting is already helping identify areas
for potential savings (both in terms of emissions and cost)
relating to energy consumption. In India, we are deploying
a Capgemini developed Smart Metering solution which is
enabling significant reductions in electricity consumption –
the initial pilot enabled double-digit savings with two months.
Once fully deployed, it is expected that the system will yield
multi-million euro cost savings.
Whilst global targets are still in development, a number of
operations have set local country level targets.

UK Case Study – UK Targets and Performance

We continue to monitor the targets set for Capgemini UK against a 2008 baseline:

To reduce our non-data center CO2 footprint by 20% by
2014 (35% by 2020)

Achieved in 2012 – Progress has continued in the
first half of 2013 with headline carbon emissions
(excluding the data centers) now down 27%
compared against the 2008 baseline

To improve energy efficiency in our data centers by more
than 20% by 2014

Achieved in 2011 – We continue to improve and are
currently showing a 27% improvement in the average
PUE1 of our data centers when compared to 2008

To reduce our CO2 related to business travel by more
than 30% by 2014

By the end of H1 2013, emissions from business
travel in the UK are down nearly 20% compared to
2008

To send zero office waste to landfill by 2014

92% of office waste was diverted from landfill in the
first half of 2013 as compared to 53% in the baseline
year 2008

To implement an ISO 14001 certified Environmental
Management System (EMS) – achieved in June 2009

Achieved in June 2009 and recertified in 2013

1.	Power Usage Effectiveness (PUE) compares the energy used for non-IT equipment in a data center (for example: lighting, cooling) with the amount of energy used to power the IT equipment. Put simply, the lower the PUE, the
more efficient a data center is. The theoretical minimum (i.e. most efficient) ratio possible is 1.0. The industry average in the UK is around 2.0.

18

Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Review 2013

2.4
Key Performance Indicators
Given that our global carbon accounting system is currently
being rolled out, the maturity of environmental reporting varies
across the Group. At the time of data collation for the 2012
Annual Report, Capgemini UK data was the only country data
available directly from the Carbon Accounting system. All other
countries performed specific data gathering exercises to collate
the data presented in this report.
In presenting the following tables of environmental data it has
been necessary to make a number of assumptions. Where
only partial data is available, extrapolation has been employed
to estimate the total annual impacts. This extrapolation has in
many cases included the figures for November and December
2012 as full data-sets were unavailable at the time of data
preparation. In rare cases, up to 6 months data had to be
extrapolated (for example: air travel by Capgemini Netherlands).
The extrapolations employed were:
•	estimating 2012 data based upon available 2011 data
(according to documented methodologies related to
differing circumstances and covering all aspects of energy,
travel and waste data)
•	estimating emissions data based on available cost data
(employing assumptions such as the cost per kwh for
electricity and gas; and cost per liter for petrol/diesel or per
km of travel)

The carbon footprint tables shown include emissions
associated with use of gas, diesel, electricity (in data centers
and offices), urban heating, steam, cooling and business travel.
As water usage is not considered a significant environmental
aspect for Capgemini, it has been excluded. However, water
is included as part of the carbon accounting system roll out,
which will allow us to identify consumption areas where there
may be a more significant impact from our use of water (for
example: in some cooling systems).
Following an external audit of our 2012 data presented in
our Annual Report, it was decided not to detail Capgemini’s
consumption of paper, the generation of waste and the amount
recycled within this report as the current data gathering
practices differ significantly between countries. A smaller
number of countries (for example: the UK and the Netherlands)
have more robust data sets enabling the success of waste
reduction and recycling initiatives to be measured. For
example, the UK generated a total of 257 tons of general waste
(excluding hazardous waste) across its facilities in 2012 with a
recycling rate of 69 per cent.
Although waste produced is reported locally in certain
countries, as the waste volume available for most countries is
based on estimated values, it was decided that the resulting
emissions calculations were unlikely to be representative and
have therefore been excluded from this report.

Where no data was available, as was often the case for water
consumption and some modes of transport, the data has been
deliberately excluded. Full details of the assumptions employed
can be made available upon request.
Capgemini’s largest operating units in France, India, the
UK, the Netherlands and North America (including Canada
and the United States of America) account for 70 per cent
of Capgemini’s global headcount. The combined carbon
emissions of these operations amounts to 280,337 tons of
CO2e emitted, calculated in most cases using the conversion
factors and methodology recommended by the UK
Government’s Department of Environment, Farming and Rural
Affairs (DEFRA). Where country specific conversion factors
have been identified as more accurate, these have been used
(for example: ADEME factors for certain French data including
emissions from urban heating).

19

The table opposite shows the energy consumption and carbon
emissions associated with Capgemini and Sogeti operations
in France, India, The Netherlands, UK and North America
(United States of America and Canada). Where available
the data for Capgemini and Sogeti is shown separately.
For India and France the data for Capgemini and Sogeti is
showed combined.
Environment data has also been collected from Capgemini’s
operations in Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, China
(including Hong Kong), Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland,
Germany, Guatemala, Hungary, Italy, Mexico, Norway,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Spain,
Sweden, and Vietnam as well as Sogeti operations in Belgium,
Finland, Luxemburg, Spain, and Sweden.
The combined emissions of these operations, equating to 27
per cent of the Group by headcount, amounted to an estimated
57,993 tons of CO2e in 2012.
Combined with the largest operations, this produces an overall
estimated emissions figure for Capgemini Group of 338,330
tons of CO2e including hotel nights (and 317,090 tons of CO2e
excluding hotel nights). This figure provides an indicative
coverage of 97 per cent of the Group by headcount (see
Appendix C).

20

Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Review 2013

Currently, the data for the United Kingdom represents the
most complete data set: robust carbon accounting has been
in place since 2009 with annual external verification being
conducted since 2010. The 2012 data set, has been audited as
part of Capgemini UK’s Eco-Management and Audit Scheme
(EMAS) report using the principles of ISO 14064. Capgemini
Netherlands also report on an annual basis via the Capgemini
Netherlands Annual Management Report, where data is also
verified externally.
Capgemini France and North America prepare carbon
emissions estimates on an annual basis. Currently a good
degree of extrapolation has been required, mainly for North
America where much of the data had to be extrapolated
based upon 2010 and 2011 carbon footprint calculations.
For Capgemini India, the above data represents the first full
calculation of its carbon footprint.
In the last ten years, no sanctions or fines regarding non
compliance with environmental legislation has been
brought to our attention.

	

Energy 	

MwH

Travel
Emissions in Tons CO2e

Waste in tons

Countries

Energy
(All sources)

Gas

Diesel

Data
Centre
Electricity

Office
Electricity

Electricity
Urban
Heating

Business
Travel

Business
Travel (Hotel
nights only)

Totoal
Emissions inc.
Hotels (Tons
CO2e)

Waste (NonHazardous)

India - Capgemini & Sogeti

88,845

NA

7,174

NA

74,010

NA

30,677

6,782

111,860

507

France - Capgemini &
Sogetit

67,438

31

48

3,102

2,539

1878

21,454

4,697

27,361

0

UK - Capgemini

66,752

448

63

26,616

6,731

NA

14,722

3,376

48,580

271

UK - Sogeti

115

0

0

NA

60

NA

298

46

358

0

Netherlands - Capgemini

27,592

563

16

6,518

3,436

0

21,157

581

31,690

245

Netherlands - Sogeti

1,167

0

0

44

444

NA

115

0

604

0

North America - Capgemini
& Sogeti

85,224

387

44

28,477

3,309

0

27,665

5,758

59,882

452

Total - Largest Operations

337,132

1,429

7,345

64,757

90,529

187

116, 089

21,240

280,337

1,474

Excluding hotel nights 259,097
NOTES
1.		North America: The majority of data for North America (including USA and Canada) have been extrapolated based upon available 2011 data
2.	Energy: Given the nature of our business, many of Capgemini’s offices have large server rooms. These are not considered to be data centers but their presence should be taken into
consideration when comparing the energy usage of our offices against those in other sectors
3.	Travel: Emission factors as produced by the Carbon Neutral Company have been used to calculate the emissions associated with hotel nights in all countries. It was identified during the external
Grenelle II audit, that these factors, when applied outside the UK, may be too high with the result that the figures presented above are likely to be higher than reality. As more appropriate
emission factors could not be obtained, the figures have been reported as calculated but with total emissions from hotel stays also shown separately. It is acknowledged that the figures
represent a likely worse case and the methodology employed will be reviewed for future reports
4.	 Travel: In some countries, for example France and North America, the number of nights is estimated
5.	 Travel: In Capgemini Netherlands emissions data associated with travel includes personal car use as well as business mileage as it could not be separated
6.	 Travel: In Capgemini India and UK, emissions associated with taxi journeys have been included
7.	Sogeti: The data for India and France contain the Sogeti operations within those countries. For UK and the Netherlands the values were available separately and reported as such. No Sogeti
data were available in North America
8.	 Table key: NA (not applicable) denotes areas where data is not available because the source is not used. For example: there is no urban heating in the UK
9.	Table key: 0 denotes areas where data was not available. The emissions reported for Capgemini India have risen significantly compared to those reported in the 2011 Annual Report. This is due
primarily to greater data coverage for the Indian operations. In 2011, the Indian energy data were limited to Capgemini’s operations in Mumbai, Bangalore and Kolkata. The 2012 figures include
information from 33 separate facilities in nine Indian cities. The 2012 figures for India also include travel data where limited travel data was previously available. Overall emissions reported for
Capgemini France have also risen since those reported in 2011. This is due to the a more comprehensive data gathering exercise having been undertaken in 2012 leading to more complete
view of overall emissions.

21

3. Community
Engagement
Capgemini remains as firmly committed to the
social aspects of sustainability as we are to
the environmental. As such, we recognize our
responsibility to the communities in which we
operate. Our focus on community projects is very
much aligned to our corporate purpose and values
and we recognize our responsibility to contribute to
the talent and skills of the wider population.

22

Our fundamental community
philosophy is to support skills for the
future, education and inclusion. We
acknowledge that diversity is a source
of richness and competitive advantage
so our aim is to support diversity and
nurture future talent in all its forms.
We operate in communities across the
world both from our network of offices
and from our client and Rightshore®
sites. Our longevity depends in part on
our support of these communities and
the interest of our employees at local,
national and international levels.

regular internal campaigns. We also
measure progress through our annual
Group Employee Survey. Work on our
global community policy continued in
2013 with a view to rolling out in 2014.

Our intention is to provide as many
opportunities as we can for our
employees and to engage in activities
for which they have passion and
commitment. Additionally, we align
and embed our community program
with our business activities and
client work to ensure sustainability.
We share this with our people, our
community partners and our clients
through communication vehicles such
as our externally published Corporate
Responsibility & Sustainability Review,
our internet site and our intranet and

Capgemini actively encourages its
employees at all levels to get involved
in the communities where they live and
work. We channel our time, energy and
creativity into having a positive impact
through partnerships with various
foundations, volunteering, pro bono
work, fundraising and also by awarding
funding, where appropriate. Joining
forces to help others strengthens team
spirit, improves communication skills
and procures a better understanding of
the communities around us.

Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Review 2013

As a major global player, Capgemini
works with national and international
organizations on community projects
ensuring that charitable organizations
are legitimate and their goals are
compatible with the Group’s values,
our Code of Business Ethics and our
Community policy.

3.1 Our Global Initiatives

Naandi
We maintain a strong partnership with the Naandi Foundation
and its Nanhi Kali Initiative, focusing on supporting young girls
through their school education. By the end of 2013 we will have
supported over 63,000 school years of education. We remain
Nanndi’s largest corporate sponsor of Nanhi Kali internationally
and the second largest for the foundation overall. Nanhi Kali
has been officially adopted in the Community Engagement
approach in 13 countries across Capgemini with Italy being the
latest to launch a Naandi initiative.
In addition to directly supporting students, Capgemini UK has
opened 10 Hamari school libraries in schools attended by
Nanhi Kali girls, providing them with access to a wide choice of
books, newspapers and educational documents. The libraries
are managed by a full-time librarian. Summer 2012 also saw
the launch of a new initiative by Capgemini UK; the Last Lap
program supports smaller groups of girls in their final two years
of school and with aspirations that the students will go onto
further education. Support is given to see them through their
final school leaving exams by providing extra exam coaching,
skills building sessions, and an opportunity to get some work
experience with our Capgemini India business.

Capgemini UK’s ASPIRE business unit, continued the adoption
of a school in Mumbai thanks to fund-raising efforts which
to date have generated a little over 23,500 from the sale of
samosas at the ASPIRE offices. This funding enables Naandi
to provide basic academic knowledge to children from the
severely underprivileged area in which the school is located
and to encourage them to continue their education.
 apgemini Norway supported a client in opening a further
C
10 Hamari school libraries in Mumbai and continues to back
project Nanhi Kali as its global Community Engagement
initiative. Capgemini India opened up the Nanhi Kali
sponsorship scheme to all 44,000 plus employees across India
and is also supporting Capgemini UK in delivering the Last Lap
program.

France - 35
Italy - 24
Denmark - 208
Netherlands - 901
Germany - 411

Norway - 1,799

North America - 102

Holding - 141
Australia - 280
Finland - 300

India - 1,499

MicroWorld
Sogeti has worked with PlaNet Finance since 1999 providing
support to the organization, helping it grow and focus on
its core mission by providing technological expertise and IT
support. MicroWorld is a subsidiary of PlaNet Finance and is
the first European online platform where employees can learn
about, browse and select micro entrepreneurs to support
by making a small loan. By choosing a micro entrepreneur
an employee can invite other colleagues to support the
entrepreneur, as well. Throughout the year, the lender receives
information on how the micro entrepreneur is doing, allowing
lenders to become truly involved.
In 2012 we launched the MicroWorld platform in France
and Ireland, Netherlands, Sweden, Norway, Denmark and
Germany. Since the beginning of our involvement, a total of
1,165 projects of micro entrepreneurs have been co-funded
with 70,000 euro leant by 1,106 members.

UK - 1,983

Sweden - 1,684

BREAKDOWN OF REVENUE BY SECTOR
Energy, Utilities
& Chemicals - 11.3%

Financial Services - 19.8%

Consumer Products,
Retail, Distribution
& Transportation - 14.1%

Other - 4.7%

Manufacturing - 17.8%

Public
Sector - 23.2%

Telecom, Media
& Entertainment - 9.1%

BREAKDOWN OF REVENUE BY BUSINESS
Local Professional
Services - 14.9%
Consulting

23

3.2 Some of our National Initiatives
Capgemini Poland’s grant program ‘We
invest in good ideas’ was designed in
response to numerous grassroots initiatives
of employees being aware of the acute social
problems in their local surroundings. Employees engaged
in volunteering activities aimed at solving these problems.
Capgemini Poland supported with funding, know-how and
organizational support to the employees who came forward
with the best ideas. Ten projects were realized in 2012, another
15 were started in 2013, involving 180 volunteers of which
58 were Capgemini employees. Beneficiaries of the program
included a nursery school, an orphanage, an elderly citizen’s
club and an animal shelter. With this program the BPO Center
in Poland received the European Outsourcing Award in the
Corporate Social Responsibility category.

Through the EduKare initiative, Capgemini India financially
assists its housekeeping and physical security staff in meeting
educational expenses of their children. Started in 2010 at
the Chennai location, the initiative was also taken up in other
locations of Hyderabad and Pune in 2012. The students in
this program are from primary level up to students pursuing
their graduation. They are meritorious but have a financially
weak background. The funds provided help with fees and the
purchase of stationery and school uniforms and in some cases
lodging and boarding expenses. In 2012 with a total of 212,870
students benefitted from them.
Capgemini France is the main partner of TADEO, a
communication platform which allows deaf and hearing
impaired people to receive and make phone calls, participate
in meetings and be trained in all autonomy. Tadeo provides
a wide range of real-time remote services such as: Instant
Speech-to-Text Transcription (ISTT), Visio-interpretation in
French Sign Language, Cued Speech Transcription (CST), Lip
reading associated with Transcription (RepeaWriting – RW).
Capgemini Belgium is one of the companies sponsoring the
Belgian Punch Powertrain Solar Team. Seventeen students
form the basis of this team. They have 15 months to design
and construct a solar car, in order to participate in the 2013
World Solar Challenge, the world championship for solar cars.
The team members come from the electro-mechanics and
electronics streams of Group T – at the International University
of Leuven.

24

Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Review 2013

Capgemini North America conducted their first regional day of
service, branded “Capgemini Cares”, on September 21, 2012.
A thousand employee volunteers united and served side by
side with other colleagues in their local communities at 21 sites
across the US and Canada. Each community service project
was identified by a local team and included everything from
supporting the local food bank, or cleaning up a local park, to
assisting at a local homeless shelter. In one day we completed
over 3,000 volunteer hours in communities where we work
and live.

Capgemini Netherlands and Sport & Business rolled out
a Company Sports Program in 2013. Challenges were
organized around running, cycling, tennis and squash with
the enthusiasm and participation of employees exceeding all
expectations. In June 2013 Capgemini Young Professionals
– with a realistic plan that meets the current needs within
the company and provides interconnection – won the Young
Professional Vitality Battle 2013, a battle between companies,
organized by Sport & Business.
Initiated in 2008, Project Theater has become a major
Capgemini Poland event involving many employees each
year. In 2012, after 3 months of non-stop rehearsals, 32
Outsourcing professionals transformed into actors, producers
and stage designers, put on a one hour show of singing,
dancing and laughing for a 1,000 strong audience. With
this first ever musical in the history of Project Theatres, Little
Red Riding Cap, Capgemini Poland collected 3,200 euro for
partner organization Siemacha. Siemacha runs institutions
for children’s sociotherapy, emergency care, education
and psychotherapy.

Capgemini Italy has teamed with two of our IT partners, to
create the digital school ‘School 2.0’ at the Ettore Majorana
technical institute in Bari. Capgemini Italy provided the platform
for this innovative model in the educational sector where
students can access, through a notebook or PC, school
material on a shared network and attend online, subject
specific, discussions and forums with teachers and fellow
students. The project is being expanded to thirteen other
schools and institutions throughout Italy creating a virtual and
national academic network where teachers have the ability
to upload their lessons real time via touch screen electronic
‘blackboards’. Students then have the opportunity to download
these same lessons and notes, which is allowing greater
inclusivity for students who may not be able to attend regular
school lessons; increasing collaboration and knowledge
sharing; reducing the need for physical books and raw
materials; allowing the inclusion of parents; connecting them
directly with teaching staff; and leveraging the expertise of our
own employees.

3.3 Community Investment and Donations
The table below summarizes charitable donations made by Capgemini around the world in 2012.
Country

Donations

Programs

India

42,472€

We are society

France

292,480€

125k RSE (50 k€ Cercle Passport, 20k€ IMS Entreprendre pour la cité Etude stereotypes, 15k€ Ims Entreprendre/Défis
Mecenova, 15k€ Partenariat Fondation Yann Arthus Bertrandi) 167k€ mission handicap

NL

194,300€

64k€ CERVO/promotional Articles, 12k€ EMC forum, 12k€ Several Sports, 10k€ Kessler foundation, 10k€ Leerstoel, 10k€ NvZD

UK

127,217€

North America

76,866€

Largest Operations Sub Total

733,335€

Other Europe Sub Total

548,035€

Asia and Australia Sub Total

9,999€

Latin America Sub Total

5,010€

Sogeti

85,234€

GRAND TOTAL

1,381,613€

United Way, Naandi Foundation, Ninos de lagos
Charles Tilman Foundation, Feed my starving Children, Regina, Dominican High School, Foundation for the Carolinas, CWFW,
American India Foundation, N Power Charlotte

Landsindsamlingen 2012, Naandi, Red Barnet
Capgemini Italy - 95k€ Planet Finance, 15k€ SANT ANDREA TERRE VICINE E LONTANE
Naandi
Capgemini Spain - Fundacíon Adecco (145k€)
FCSD (Fundacion Catalana Sindrome de Down) (50k€), Fundacion Roig Alfonso-Mercadona (20k€)
FUNDAL (Fundacion Para el Deporte de Alboonbendas) (20k€)
CADIN (Centro de Apoio ao Desenvolvimento Infantil)

25k€ Foundation Make A Wish, 30k€ Foundation St. Opkikker, 11k€ Foundation Kinderen Kankervri.

Notes
•	 France includes the donations for Sogeti France
•	 Other Europe includes Denmark, Italy, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Portugal, Germany, Finland, Poland, Czech Republic
•	 Asia and Australia includes Asia Pacific and Australia
•	 Latin America includes Chile and Guatemala
•	 Sogeti include Sogeti Netherlands and Sogeti Germany

25

4. People Culture
People Culture is about being a responsible
and inclusive employer, whom people
choose to work for and which allows them to
deliver their best. Our focus is on the
professional development and well-being of
all our employees by ensuring that both our
business practices and our facilities
empower our delivery excellence. We have a
culture whereby we respect and value the
diversity of all our people.

It is the quality of
our people, and their
capacity to deliver fitting
solutions, with you and
for you that drive real
business results.

26

Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Review 2013

4.1 People demographics
In 2013 Capgemini had more than 130,000 employees.
Headcount growth was largely generated in India. The size
of this growth has been a significant influence on the Group’s
transformation. The workforce has more than doubled in the
last decade with the majority of the growth in our Rightshore®
operations.
These locations have included the growth in Central Europe,
notably due to the development of the Business Process
Outsourcing business in Poland, and the emergence of Latin
America following the acquisition of CPM Braxis in Brazil.
Benelux was the main region to see its headcount fall for the
third year in a row, due in particular to the difficult economic
situation in the Netherlands.

4.2 Professional
Development

The Group’s on-line learning management system, MyLearning,
open to all employees, is used for informal and just-in-time
learning but also to register for more formal, structured learning
events. The catalog of courses includes a range of training
options to suit different learning styles, including e-learning,
books, on-line mentoring, test-preps, on-line examinations,
language courses, live virtual training sessions and meetings,
and classroom teaching.
Established in 1987, Capgemini University offers innovative
learning solutions to our employees worldwide through our
international Center of Excellence near Paris (Les Fontaines) as
well as through virtual and local classroom learning programs
and a wealth of other e-learning programs. Capgemini
University plays a key role in developing team skills and
capabilities in line with the company’s strategy, priorities and
client expectations. It creates and delivers learning journeys
for sustainable results at the individual, community and group
level. In recognition of this, in 2013, Capgemini University was
awarded a series of prestigious Brandon Hall ‘Excellence in
Learning’ awards:
•	
“Best Use of Virtual Worlds for Learning”;

The value of a consulting and IT services company lies in the
quality of its intellectual capital. In an industry characterized by
rapid technological change and changing patterns of work, it
is essential for employees to keep their knowledge and skills
up-to-date and in line with client and market needs. Likewise,
new employees joining the Group are keen to leverage and
build on their knowledge and to gain rewarding professional
experience. As part of our commitment to the continuing
development of all employees an annual performance review
process is in place.
Employees’ professional development is supported by a
Career and Competency Framework which forms the basis for
performance appraisals and personal career advancement.
This has been designed to help employees to develop in
a wide variety of different roles, with the clarity required to
support clear career progression, and the flexibility to let them
take charge of their own career.

•	
“Best in Compliance Training”; and
•	
“Best Use of Blended Learning”.

Capgemini University was accredited by the European
Foundation for Management Development (EFMD) in 2008
and in 2012 the University delivered more than 2 million
learning hours to over 100,000 employees across the Group.
In August 2013, Capgemini University introduced the My
Essentials curriculum which offers new hires information on
Capgemini’s history, values, ways of working, functional areas
and organizational structure..
Overall, around 110,000 employees were trained in 2012, up
8% compared to 2011 with the total number of training hours
being 4.25 million.

27

4.3 Diversity & equal opportunity
With more than 130,000 employees in over 44 countries
representing 120 nationalities, Capgemini is proud of its
wide cultural diversity. Diversity has many facets including
gender, disability, ethnicity, age and lifestyle. At Capgemini,
our definition of diversity also includes dimensions such as
experience, personality, communication and working styles all part of diversity of thought. Our differences are a source of
innovation and inspiration. Inclusion means having a working
culture where our diversity is valued enabling us to generate
new ideas, anticipate market trends, and be thought leaders in
our chosen markets.
We view diversity and inclusion as both a strategic advantage
and an ongoing opportunity. In 2011 we produced our Global
charter for Diversity and Inclusion to formalize our active
promotion of the principles of diversity in our employment
practices. Our aim is to encourage individuals from diverse
backgrounds who are innovative, enthusiastic, culturally aware
and committed to delivering a truly collaborative experience to
our clients.
Women@Capgemini was launched in 2012 as a global
business program to set the overarching guidelines around
gender diversity across the Group. It is based on the principle
of “equal opportunities, equal chances” and articulated around
Attracting / Recruiting, Promotion / Development, Retention,
and Corporate Awareness. Various activities were launched
in 2013 including engagement with both internal and external
recruiters and the initiation of a global mentoring program to
allow high potential employees of both genders to be mentored
by experienced Vice Presidents of the opposite gender.
For Capgemini India breaking barriers for hearing impaired
people has been firmly on the agenda in the past year, leading
to the hiring and successful integration of 10 employees with
a hearing impairment. A number of factors were instrumental
in achieving successful integration such as the raising of
awareness, sensitization and team integration workshops,
defining suitable roles, organizing a ‘walk-in’ for people with
disabilities, the review of online and classroom training and a
review of transport arrangements. Capgemini France launched
the project “Nos Talents au Féminin” in 2013 to celebrate
women throughout the month of March promoting job diversity
and career women engineers. Employees enjoyed and joined
the many initiatives: women candidates increased during
this period; 7,000 people visited the web site for more than 5
minutes; 5,000 people were evaluated on their stereotypes
through a questionnaire; the stereotypes study has been
downloaded 900 times, the profiles of 20 women were
communicated. This project will be continued in 2014.

28

Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Review 2013

In recent years many of the Capgemini countries have initiated
women’s networks. FeN, Capgemini Netherlands’ Female
Network, started in 2012 for a specific group of female
professionals, and opened up in 2013 to a wider audience of
women. Based on a three year ambition, they organize their
events and initiatives around the topics of networking, diversity
and career development.

Oda Network, the largest network for women in the IT
industry in Norway, gave away awards to highlight visible role
models and businesses in the IT industry in June 2013. The
award called “Organization 2013” was given to the bestin-test company Sogeti Norway for promoting women in
business through its activities and attitudes. Sogeti Norway
has 44% women on the Board and half the members of the
management team are women.
In North America and the UK we also have employee resource
groups / business networks for other diversity dimensions
such as OUTfront for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender
and Allies; and the Millennial Innovation Council for
cross-generational collaboration.

Capgemini India have been recognized
by the 15th Shell Helen Keller Awards,
run by the National Centre for Promotion
of Employment for Disabled People, as a
role model company where, through our
policies and practices we have demonstrated our belief
in equal rights and the gainful employment of persons
with disabilities.

4.4 Work organization, health & well-being
Even though the Group’s businesses do not involve highrisk activities, health and well-being of our employees are
nevertheless taken very seriously. More important is the fact
that playing and winning in the Champions League of our
industry requires a vital workforce.

wellbeing at work. Therefore Capgemini takes over the costs
for a full health check-up in high standard exclusively selected
doctors’ offices. The health check up initiative is spreading over
Capgemini’s business units with Sogeti joining in 2013. Within
the last 5 years, over 600 employees have attended the healthcheck up initiative.

At a minimum across the Group, we abide by all local Health
and Safety legal requirements. Our Health and Safety policies
are focused on information, instruction and training covering
topics of all work related health issues, emergency procedures
and guidelines on Capgemini employees working on client
sites. Our social guidelines and local vitality programs
contribute to the well-being of our employees: work-life
balance, stress management, improvement of employeemanager relations, and better working conditions. Additionally,
Group initiatives such as Smarter Travel Week raise awareness
of health, safety, security and environmental considerations for
business, commuting and domestic travel.
Within Capgemini France, Health and Safety Committees
(HSC) are set by locations or business units. Their main
objective is to analyze situations that might have an impact
on the work force: moving projects, working at clients’
sites, safety regarding offices or working conditions stress.
Actions and decisions are reviewed and taken in quarterly
meetings and whenever needed, extraordinary meetings
might be called. HSC may decide to drive surveys or studies if
deemed necessary, to help the management improve working
conditions and security matters.

Capgemini Germany offers a complete health-check for
employees aged 35 years or older. Capgemini wants to
improve awareness, about health care themes and peoples

Based on several events in the social context regarding
women safety, Capgemini India felt the need to educate female
employees some basic skills of self defense. A 60 minute
workshop on self defense was organized during the celebration
of International Women's Week. This was followed up by the
roll out of a 90 minute workshop on self defense for all female
employees PAN India. This workshop is still running and
feedback from employees has been very positive.
Early in 2013 Capgemini Netherlands, together with their
partner Sport & Business, performed a sport and activity
scan under all employees. The result was rather gloomy. 85%
of the employees did not meet the national norm of being
moderately active for 30 minutes five days a week. A company
sports program was designed and rolled out, with challenges
around running, cycling, tennis and squash. The participation
grade for all sports exceeded expectations. In June a Young
Professional team won the National Vitality Battle. According
to the judges Capgemini won the Vitality Battle, because
"their realistic plan connects with the current needs within
the company and it aims to interconnect." To increase sport
participation the Capgemini team came up with the plan to
launch a social sport platform, where each employee will be
able to track his or her own performance and colleagues can
find each other to sport together and motivate one another to
stay focused.
In Capgemini North America the workforce is actively involved
in the development of a positive health and safety culture
through ongoing training as part of the Employee Assistance
Program including training on wellness, stress management,
and managing conflict.

29

4.5 Social Dialogue/Employee engagement
Capgemini believes effective communication is a precondition
for an open and honest culture, and for the involvement and
engagement of employees. It is also essential for effective
knowledge dissemination, sharing success and creating
a sense of belonging within teams, at both the Group and
local level.

The emphasis on transparent dialog with employee
representatives is particularly important in difficult economical
times. In 2012, Capgemini conducted two restructuring
plans, one in Spain and one in the Netherlands. Both plans
were discussed in-depth and negotiated with our employee’s
representatives.

At the heart of Capgemini’s communications philosophy is
a commitment to two-way dialog. While informal dialog is
always encouraged, understanding the engagement and
satisfaction levels of employees is also formally sought through
the annual Group Employee Survey process. The company
furthermore upholds the laws of representation and recognizes
the importance of constructive dialog between employees and
management in shaping key decisions affecting the running
of the Group. The International Works Council (IWC) enables
employee representatives to bring employee interests directly
to the attention of Group management and, in return, to be
directly informed by management of plans for the Company
and the impact of such plans on employees. In countries
where the social dialog is not governed by local regulations, the
management of labor relations is done in a proactive manner
by engaging with employees to understand and alleviate their
issues (the Group Employee Survey being a key tool in this
matter).

At Capgemini, we are committed to deliver first-class results for
our clients. We can only achieve this through the mobilization of
our cross-unit capabilities, and the strengths and expertise of
our people. Following the success of our La Niaque campaign
in 2012-13, we launched the People & Results campaign in
September 2013 to support our Champions League ambition,
to play with only the best of our industry. This new internal
multimedia campaign focuses on four key drivers - Growth,
Innovation, Talent and Competitiveness. It recognizes the team
members behind our results and the value our employees bring
to our clients.

30

Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Review 2013

4.6 Leadership
While the Group CEO sets the strategic vision of our company,
it is our leaders around the Group who deliver the vision and,
at the same time, create the culture for attracting and retaining
talent. Our leaders are of vital importance to the success of
our Group at all levels: winning opportunities, delivering our
commitments to clients, inspiring colleagues and living the
Collaborative Business Experience.
In 2012 Capgemini was recognized for the Expert Connect
program at the Marketing Excellence Awards organized by
the Chartered Institute for Marketing. Our approach with
Expert Connect has been to build up a social community
where the content and conversations are led by the experts
themselves. Today, the platform features a more than 350
experts from around the world, discussing topics that impact
multiple sectors and most of our clients’ key challenges. Our
experts have gained over 68,000 followers, with over 250,000
conversations, 1,300 publications and 270 videos so far.
Capgemini is dedicated to developing the insights, capabilities,
and practical skills to elevate the level of leading and increase
the overall impact of our senior leaders’ to the business. With
an eye to that, and following the success of this program in
North America last year, Capgemini’s University designed a
unique and global Leadership Advantage Facilitated Virtual
Learning Journey Program. These programs are made
attractive with high flexibility and self-paced options to fit our
busy leaders’ schedules; they have a high level of interactivity
to ensure maximum engagement; they offer a load of group
activities for sustaining interest; and also gives the opportunity
for self-paced certifications. It is a blended learning journey of
online sessions and face-to-face interactions.

31

5. Client Services
We are dedicated to developing profitable and
sustainable business by working together with
our clients to deliver value through our skills and
expertise.

5.1 Enabling Client Transformation
Clients are increasingly expecting their
suppliers to help them address their
own sustainability challenges such
as decreasing their environmental
impacts. As a provider of business
transformation services, we believe that
we are well positioned to help clients
with these challenges, challenges
which we expect to be amplified by
increasing sustainability constraints and
regulatory pressures around the world.
As a service provider, we have an
opportunity to help clients with their
own carbon challenges in terms of
the advice that we offer and solutions
that we design and deliver. We also
recognize that operational efficiency is
a key factor in ensuring longevity for our
clients and that this often goes hand in
hand with reduced carbon emissions.
Therefore, considering sustainability
principles through our service offerings
ensures clients can meet the rising
demands of regulation, competition,
rising operational costs and mounting
scrutiny upon the consumption
of resources.

32

Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Review 2013

As an outsourcing provider, we ensure
that when clients outsource their
operations to us, we can proactively
mitigate the risk of increasing emissions
through our sustainable data centers
and improving the energy efficiency of
our clients’ IT estate.
We are very proud of having “the most
sustainable data center in the world,”
as part of our portfolio of data centers.
Based on state-of-the-art technology,
Merlin was opened in Swindon, UK,
in October 2010 to ensure client’s
systems are run as efficiently as
technologically possible with reduced
emissions (based on their own in-house
systems). It has won the Data Centre
Dynamics Leaders’ Green Data Centre
Award, and the Uptime Institute’s Green
IT Award for data center design. It was
also a runner up in The Guardian’s 2011
Sustainable Business Awards, and a
Finalist in the 2011 Business Green
Leader’s awards.
Throughout 2012 and 2013 we have
continued to increase our portfolio
of service offerings based on our
evaluation of the current market drivers.

5.2 Sustainability Reporting and Carbon Accounting
To help companies effectively manage their sustainability
agenda, Capgemini has developed a sustainability data
management capability that is both unique and compelling.
The solution is highly cost effective, as well as delivering the
highest quality data management and reporting. Capgemini
provides sustainability and business process expertise,
underpinned by a comprehensive technology platform, in
a single integrated service. Thanks to efficient and reliable
outsourced data management combined with a CDP (Carbon
Disclosure Project) accredited technology platform, our clients
are able to move beyond cost reduction, and use sustainability
to deliver business value and competitive advantage in
the market.
Smart Energy Management Solutions Capgemini's
Intelligent Energy Management is a multi-component energy
management offering that reduces carbon emissions while
giving our customers greater choice, control and convenience.

Intelligent Energy Management comes from our Smart
Energy Services unit which provides the full spectrum of
smart metering, smart grid, smart home solutions and smart
analytics to utilities across the globe. Capgemini's commitment
is strong with more than 7,000 professionals dedicated to the
utility sector and benefit from an ecosystem of expertise from
long standing global technology partners. We also offer a
usage-based pricing model called Managed Business Services
to make costs more controllable for the utility. The offering
leverages a range of proven services and best practices
successfully developed by Capgemini since 2004 working with
more than 20 utilities spanning the globe; including in North
America: Duke Energy, Hydro One, National Grid, Oncor, San
Diego Gas & Electric, SunPower, Toronto Hydro and in Europe:
Commission de Regulation de l'Energie, EDF, ERDF, GrDF,
Enel, Enercity, Energiedienst, Rhein Ruhr Partner as well as
Yunnan Grid in China.

SUSTAINABLE DATA CENTER SERVICES
Sustainability has been at the heart of our Merlin Data Center project from the selection of its location, through its design
and construction, to the day-to-day operations of the site. Among Merlin’s key sustainability achievements are:-	A PUE (Power Usage
Effectiveness) ratio
of 1.10 which means
power savings of
91% compared to an
‘industry average’ data
center;

-	A fresh air cooling
system that delivers
80% savings in run
costs and produces
up to 50% less carbon
emissions than
traditional data center
cooling solutions; and

-	The elimination
of batteries in the
Uninterruptible Power
Supply (UPS) thanks
to the application
of innovative
flywheel technology.

All of this has been
achieved while fulfilling
some of the industry’s
most rigorous security and
resiliency demands, leading
to Merlin winning the EU
Code of Conduct for Data
Center efficiency award at
the 2013 awards.

33

5.3 Client Satisfaction Approach
Our client relationship management process, known as
OTACE (On Time and At or Above Client Expectations) is a
key factor underpinning our strong client relationships. Clients
are requested to specify their expectations from our services
based on a set of indicators relating to the following:
•	 type of service required;
•	 nature of the working relationship; and
•	 knowledge sharing.
We document and set these indicators with clients to produce
ratings that are reviewed regularly according to an agreed
schedule.
By allowing us to better assess the client satisfaction level
with respect to their deliverables of their project(s), OTACE
allows us to identify not only our strengths but also areas for
improvement.
Our client focus and the Collaborative Business Experience of
Capgemini is the essence of the way we work with our clients.
Client satisfaction and their appreciation of the value we bring
in contributing to making their businesses successful and
sustainable is essential to our business.

HIGHLIGHT 2012 OTACE SCORES
In 2012, nearly 4,000 client engagements were
monitored using OTACE. The results showed that
95% of projects were delivered on time (4% up on
2011 results) and 92% met or exceeded customer
expectations, with an average client satisfaction of
4.3 out of 5.

34

Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Review 2013

Our Group operations serve many clients, distributed in
several business sectors and countries. The Group’s largest
client, a major British public body, contributes around 9%
of Group revenues (9% in 2011 and 10% in 2010), while the
second-largest client accounts for just 2%. The top 10 clients
collectively account for 22% of Group revenues. The solvency
of these major clients and the sheer diversity of the other
smaller clients help limit credit risk. The economic environment
could impact the business activities of the Group’s clients, as
well as the amounts receivable from these clients. However,
the Group does not consider that any of its clients, business
sectors or geographic areas present a significant risk of noncollection that could materially impact the financial position of
the Group as a whole.

Awards and Recognition

Capgemini UK awarded Business in
the Community ‘Community Mark’ and
Platinum status in the CR Index 2013

Merlin wins the 2013 EU Code of
Condcut for Data Center Award

Capgemini Poland’s grant program
‘We invest in good ideas’ received
the European Outsourcing Award in
the Corporate Social Responsibility
category.

UK Sustainability report EMAS
Registered for 3rd year

Capgemini rated ‘Prime’
by Oekom research

Capgemini Belgium is one of 54
companies certificated as the Top
Employers België- Belgique 2013.

Once again Capgemini was
recognized by the Times
newspaper as one of the Top 50
places for women to work in 2013

Capgemini University was awarded
a series of prestigious Brandon Hall
‘Excellence in Learning’ awards in 2013

Sogeti Norway awarded ‘Organization
of the Year’ 2013 by ODA Network for
the promotion of women in business
through our activities and attitudes

35

Denmark - 208
Netherlands - 901
Germany - 411

Norway - 1,799

Appendix A –
Organizational Structure
North America - 102

Holding - 141
Australia - 280
Finland - 300

India - 1,499

UK - 1,983

Sweden - 1,684

BREAKDOWN OF REVENUE BY SECTOR
Energy, Utilities
& Chemicals - 11.3%

Financial Services - 19.8%

Consumer Products,
Retail, Distribution
& Transportation - 14.1%

Other - 4.7%

Manufacturing - 17.8%

Public
Sector - 23.2%

Telecom, Media
& Entertainment - 9.1%

BREAKDOWN OF REVENUE BY BUSINESS
Local Professional
Services - 14.9%
Technology
Services - 39.8%

Consulting
Services
14.9%

Outstanding
Services - 40.4%

BREAKDOWN OF REVENUE BY COUNTRY OR REGION
Benelux - 10.9%

France - 21.3%

United
Kingdom - 20.5%

North
America - 20.5%

Rest of Europe, Asia
and Latin America - 26.8%

Appendix B –
Additional People Data
CSS

DSP

BREAKDOWN OF WORKFORCE
BY CATEGORY: 2011-2012

DSS

6.4%
2.4%

6. 2%
2.2%

91.3%

The Company’s workforce breaks down into to three broad
categories:

6.1%
2.4%

91.6%

•	Client Serving Staff (CSS) who ensure our services with
clients are managed correctly and make up the majority of
the Group’s workforce.

91.8%

•	Dedicated Sales People (DSP) who make up the sales
team and are responsible for sales and customer relations
management across the full product portfolio.

2010

2011

•	Dedicated Support Staff (DSS) who carry out administrative
support functions.

2012

BREAKDOWN OF WORKFORCE
BY PART TIME HOURS
18%

6.2%

5.2%

4.7%

4.9%

3.6%

2.8%
1.5%

December 2010

December 2011

December 2012

To
t

al

c

a
di
In

cifi
Pa
iaAs

S
an out
d he
La rn
tin E
Am uro
er pe
ica

Fr
a
M nce
or a
oc n
co d

G
Ce erm
nt an
ra y
lE a
ur nd
op
e

ne

lux

es
tri

Be

un
Co
rd
No

ite
& dK
Ire ing
lan d
d om

er
Am
rth
No

0%

Un

ica

0.4%

The coverage interval for the above data is 97% of year-end
headcount. The number of part-time employees in the Group
decreased by 0.6 points compared with 2011, to 3.6% of the
headcount in 2012. The figures show significant variation
between regions: part-time working is most widespread in the
Benelux countries with 18.9%, an increase of 3.4 pts due to a
change in the scope (without Sogeti Belux in 2012), followed by
the United Kingdom & Ireland with 6.2% which decreased by
2.9% due to economic pressure Conversely, in India and Latin
America part-time working is not widespread which, given the
importance of these regions in terms of recruitment, explains
the overall drop in this indicator as most of the headcount
growth comes from
these regions. In France (and Morocco), 5.3% or approximately
1,100 people work on a part-time basis. This figure has
remained relatively stable over the last three years.

BREAKDOWN OF WORKFORCE BY
FIXED WORKING HOURS
71%

17%
8%

35h

35h>39h

40h

2%

1%

41h>47h

48h

A study of fixed working hours in the Group showed a
wide variation between the regions. This study covered
97% of the workforce at year end. France was singled
out, with a 35-hour working week, and represented
17% of the total workforce. More than two thirds of our
employees have a 40-hour working week. This is mainly
the case in Europe (excluding the United Kingdom,
Finland and Denmark, where it is generally around 37
hours), North America and India, where the Group offers
a more attractive 40-hour week, although the legal
maximum working week is 48 hours. South American
countries vary from a base of 44 hours per week in
Guatemala, Brazil and Chile to 48 hours in Argentina.

37

BREAKDOWN OF WORKFORCE BY
LENGTH OF SERVICE: 2010-2012

33.4%

27%

26.9%
24.1%
22.3%

23.4%
19.3%

*the data shows 98% of year-end headcount

19.09%

17.6%

14.6% 15.6%

16.2% 15.7%
13.4%

11.9%

<1 year

3-4 years

1-2 years

December 2010

5-9 years

December 2011

119,707

10 years and +

Average length of service in the Company stands at 4.4
years in 2012, a decrease of 0.1 years versus 2011, due to
the high number of recruitments in the last three years. This
varies according to the geographical area, ranging from just
over 1.9 years for India to 9.7 years in the Benelux countries.

December 2012

125,110

108,698

Learning and Development
PERCENTAGE OF INDIVIDUAL
EMPLOYEES TRAINED 2012

90,156

71%

78%

85%

88%

2009

2019

2011

2012

Overall, close to 110,000 employees were trained in 2012,
up 8% compared with the previous year taking the total
volume of training hours to 4.26 million. Employees use
MyLearning for informal and just-in-time learning but also
register for more formal, structured learning events.

% of Unique Employee Trained
Headcount Total

4.25 mh
3.87 mh

% OF VIRTUAL TRAINING (IN MILLION) IN 2012

3.52 mh

The Group continued to develop its on-line training
courses increasing by more than 93% over the
year, or 1.41 million training hours. This channel
now represents 33% of total training hours.

2.88 mh

11%

15%

19%

33%

2009

2019

2011

2012

Virtual Learning
Classroom Learning

38

Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Review 2013

Performance reviews
and Workforce Profile

2011
2012
100%

98%

100%

96%

95%

98%
91%

PERCENTAGE OF EMPLOYEES HAVING HAD A
PERFORMANCE AND CAREER REVIEW IN 2012

91%
84%

74%

By establishing a clear framework based on a set of clearly
defined and explained criteria to guide the appraisal process,
we can ensure the professional development and promotion
of all employees and respect for equal opportunities. The
Performance and Development process is driven by regular
meetings between the employee and the evaluator, conducted
in relation to assignments. In both 2011 and 2012, 91% of the
workforce concerned had undergone an annual performance
review.

As
ia

In

To
t

al

dia

-P
ac

ific

S
an out
d he
La rn
tin E
Am uro
er pe
ica

elu
Be
n

Fr
a
M nce
or a
oc n
co d

x

G
Ce erm
nt an
ra y
lE a
ur nd
op
e

s
trie
un
Co
rd
No

Un

No

ite

rth

Am
er

ica

& dK
Ire ing
lan d
d om

*the data covers 97% of year-end headcount.

RATE OF ABSENTEEISM 2011-2012
*The data for this study covers 62.2% of year-end headcount.
4.3%

2011
2012

3.4%
2.7%

2.7%
2.5%

2.4%
1.8%
1.5%

1.3%

In

To
t

di

al

a

ific
ac
-P
As
ia

S
an out
d he
La rn
tin E
Am uro
er pe
ica

Fr
a
M nce
or a
oc n
co d

lux
ne
Be

G
Ce erm
nt an
ra y
lE a
ur nd
op
e

es
tri
un
Co
No
rd

Un
ite
& dK
Ire ing
lan d
d om

No

rth

Am

er

ica

0%

This percentage is relatively low due to the fact that some
countries such as India (which represents nearly a third of
our workforce) do not collect data on the number of days of
sick leave in the strict sense. In 2012, the rate of absenteeism
for sickness in the sample was 2.5%, a decrease of 0.1%
compared to 2011. The highest rate was seen in Poland, at
5.2% as last year, followed by Benelux at 3.4%. France at 2.5%
was just at the
Group average. North America is reporting a significant
increase linked to a different coverage with Sogeti US now
included. Without Sogeti, the ratio (1.7%) is very similar to last
year (1.6%).

Well being

0.95%

NUMBER OF WORK-RELATED ACCIDENTS 2011-2012

2011
2012

0.57%
0.57%

*The coverage interval for the above data is 77.3%.

0.58%
0.48%
0.37%

0.21%

0.57%

TA
L
TO

ia
In
d

Be
ne
lu
x
G
en e
tra rm
l E an
ur y
op &
e
an
So
d F
ut
r
M a
he
nc
o
ro e
r
co
Lan E
tin uro
Ampe
er an
As ica d
ia
-P
ac
ifi
c

0.05%

0.48%

C

te
d
& Kin
N
Ire go
or
la m
di
nd
c
C
ou
nt
rie
s

ni
U

N

or

th

Am

er
ic
a

0.11%

Several more regions are now tracking this information
(58.9% in 2011). In 2012 the Group recorded 461 work related
accidents a ration of 0.48% accidents per headcount, of which
44% were in France due to the regulations in force relating to
the reporting of information. The majority of these work-related
accidents were accidents during the home/workplace journey.
No work-related death occurred in the Group in 2012 (GRI LA7)

39

Diversity

73.5% 72.5% 71.9%

BREAKDOWN OF WORKFORCE
BY GENDER: 2010-2012
*The coverage interval for the data below is 96.9% of year-end headcount.

26.5% 27.59% 28.1%

Men

Women

December 2011

December 2010

Recruits

December 2012

2012 % of female

2011 % of female

2010 % of female

North America

28.0

28.4

23.3

UK & Ireland

24.9

24.0

28.0

Nordic countries

30.1

32.9

26.9

Benelux

17.0

20.5

20.9

Germany & Central Europe

47.5

45.8

45.2

France & Morocco

23.6

22.3

20.9

Southern Europe and
Latin America

43.7

41.1

40.6

Asia-Pacific
TOTAL

29.5
31.0

27.7
29.7

26.6
28.1

Female Attrition

2012

2011

2010

North America

12.0

12.6

15.2

UK & Ireland

12.4

9.6

11.0

Nordic countries

17.5

18.2

15.6

Benelux

11.6

13.9

8.7

Germany & Central Europe

20.0

23.6

17.4

France & Morocco

11.4

13.0

8.2

Southern Europe and
Latin America

16.8

17.3

14.2

Asia-Pacific

23.0

23.6

24.8

TOTAL

17.6

18.3

15.9

40

Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Review 2013

The percentage of females continued to rise in 2012,
increasing by 0.6% over 2011 to reach 28.1% of the headcount
at year end. This improvement was mainly due to strong
growth in previous years of BPO (a business sector in which
the proportion of females can reach 50%), an activity which
attracts more females, and despite its recent expansion in
countries (notably India where the ratio of males to females is
75/25) and business sectors (Services Infrastructure) where
females are less present in the workforce. Nevertheless,
in several geographic regions the percentage of females
is increasing at constant scope. In 60% of countries the
percentage of females has either improved or stabilized,
with India US, Argentina, Switzerland and Guatemala
being particularly noteworthy all progressing by 0.9%
Monitoring is carried out at the Group level to better assess
and understand the situation of women within the Group, in
compliance with applicable legislation, i.e. the percentage of
females recruited, leaving and promoted. This showed that
females represented 31% of total recruitments (rate of coverage
of 92.4% in 2012), a 1.3 points improvement versus 2011 which
contributed to the rise in the percentage of women in the
workforce at end-2012 driven by Asia Pacific, Central Europe
and Southern Europe/Latin America regions, while Benelux
further declined to a low 17%.
Nevertheless, the turnover rate for females was marginally
higher (at equivalent scope to hires) than for the total
population and increased slightly faster, moving from 15.9% in
2010 to 17.6% in 2012 (+1.7 points) while the overall turnover
rate rose by just 0,7 points during the same period.

PROPORTION OF WOMEN IN TOP EXECUTIVE
POSITIONS PER OPERATING UNIT

21%
19%
17.3%

17.8%

17.5%

15.1%

14.2%

13.9%

Following a decline in the proportion of females in the highest
executive grades in 2010, this indicator has returned to growth
by 0.3% in 2011 and 0.9% in 2012. Nevertheless, it remains
lower than the total percentage of females in all grades
combined within the Company. At the end of 2012, 17% of
employees who had been promoted to the role of “VicePresident” were female, a percentage slightly lower than the
2011 figure which was 2% higher when compared with 2010.

14.6%

12.8%

12.7%

10.7%

9

0

l2
To
ta

To
ta

l2

00

01

01

1

2

l2

l2

01

To
ta

To
ta

c
cifi

In
di
a

ica
As

ea

an

nd

ce

iaPa

o

er
Am

or
oc
c

an

d

tin

M

lE
tra

Ce
n
So

ut

he

rn

Ge

rm

Eu

ro
p

nd
an

Fr

ya

d
ite
Un

La

x

ur
op
e

elu

es
tri

Be
n

Co
un

No
rd

&

Ki

ng
do
m

No
rth

Am

er

Ire
la

ica

nd

9.7%

49.1% 48.7%

BREAKDOWN OF WORKFORCE BY AGE: 2010-2012

48.7%

*The coverage interval for the data below is 97.9%

The average age of employees is declined again in 2012
to 34.3 years due to the hiring of young graduates who
represented 42.3% of recruitment in 2012. Average age is
lowest and below 30 in Latin America (Brazil/Guatemala/
Chile),
China or Poland, whilst United Kingdom, Sweden,
4.1% India,
4.0%
4.0%
Canada and Netherlands are the only country with an average
age just above 40 years.

24.7% 24% 23.7%

9.7% 10.9 %

12.5% 12.3% 11.7%

11.9%

< 20-24 years

25-34 years

December 2010

35-44 years

December 2011

45-54 years

55 years and +

December 2012

524

NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN THE GROUP
WITH A DISABILITY 2010-2012
308

*the data above is 91% of year-end headcount.
242

2010

2011

In

di

a

ific
Pa
c
ia-

S
an out
d he
La rn
tin E
Am uro
er pe
ica

Fr
a
M nce
or a
oc n
co d

G
Ce erm
nt an
ra y
lE a
ur nd
op
e

Be

ne

lux

s
rie
nt
Co
u
rd
No

ite
& dK
Ire ing
lan d
d om

Un

ica
er
Am
th
No
r

6

As

55

50
2

Coverage has improved due to the launching of new programs
in India in 2012. Data collected indicates that Group employed
66
1,257 disabled people
of which 42% are in the UK and 25% in
France.4This is 333 people more than in 2010.

2012

41

Appendix C –
Additional Environmental Data
Capgemini Group Environmental
Policy Statement
Capgemini is one of the world’s
foremost providers of consulting,
technology and outsourcing services.
Our business activities are delivered
from both our own network of offices
and data centers as well as at our
clients’ sites.
This policy statement applies to all
offices and data centers managed
by Capgemini, all employees, and
suppliers retained by Capgemini.
Although we do not manufacture
products, we recognize that our
business activities do have impacts
on the environment and we are
committed to continually improving our
environmental performance.
We are committed to identifying and
complying with all legal and other
relevant requirements relating to
the environmental impacts of our
operations, and to the prevention
of pollution through the adoption of
appropriate controls.
Specifically, we expect the companies
in the countries we operate to:
1 have a full understanding of how to
quantify and track our environmental
impacts (at a minimum, our
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions)
in line with our statutory reporting
requirements;

Group’s energy consumption and
associated carbon footprint;
3 promote energy efficiency
improvement initiatives in our data
processing centers;
4 implement initiatives to minimize
travel (and in particular air travel),
without disrupting our ability to meet
the demands of our clients;
5 implement initiatives to reduce the
amount of waste we generate, and
to maximize the percentage of our
waste which is recycled; and
6 have procurement processes which
ensure that our suppliers provide
products and services which help us
to achieve our Group environmental
policy, particularly in relation to
carbon emissions, reducing energy
consumption, and minimizing waste
Performance against our objectives and
targets, and this Environmental Policy,
will be reviewed at least annually.
Signed: Paul Hermelin
Position: Chief Executive Officer
Date: 1st January 2013

2 identify energy saving sources within
our portfolio of offices to reduce the

42

Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Review 2013

The following table shows the total emissions figure of 338,330 tons of CO2 distributed according to the Scopes 1 (Gas and
Diesel), 2 (Electricity) and 3 (Business Travel1) definitions as set out by the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), which is a global
reporting standard seeking to standardize sustainability reporting across organizations.
Emissions in tons (CO2e)
Scope

Gas

Diesel

Data centre
electricity

Office electricity

Business Travel

Scope 1

2,122

7,442

-

-

-

Scope 2

-

-

68,118

109,819

-

Scope 3

-

-

-

-

150,829

1Note: emissions associated with our general office waste have been omitted until a suitable global emission factor can be applied

Note: emissions associated with our general office waste have been omitted until a suitable global emission factor can be applied

1

The last table below shows Capgemini’s consumption of energy together with paper consumption, waste and recycling rates.
Energy figures as measured in kilowatt hours, includes the use of electricity across our operations. Currently the use of paper and
recycling is measured using different metrics in different countries. Consequently data is provided in terms of the weight of paper
purchased,
paper
consumed
and paper recycled.
Finally,
the table
provides
details
the weight of waste and
generated
andrates.
the
The
last table
below
shows Capgemini’s
consumption
of energy
together
with
paperofconsumption,
recycling
percentage
of waste
recycled.
Energy
figures
as measured
in kilowatt hours, includes the use of electricity across our operations. Currently the use of paper and
recycling is measured using different metrics in different countries. Consequently data is provided in terms of the weight of paper
purchased,
paper
consumed
andconsumption
paper recycled.
table provides
details
ofCapgemini
the weight and
of waste
generated
andinthe
The last table
shows
the energy
and Finally,
carbonthe
emissions
associated
with
Sogeti
operations
percentage
of waste
recycled.
Australia, Austria,
Belgium,
Brazil, Chile, China (including Hong Kong), Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Guatemala,
Energy
MvH

Travel

Waste

Emissions in Tons CO2e

Tons

Country/Region

Energy (All
sources)

Gas

Diesel

Data
Centre
Electricity

Office
Electricity

Electricity
Urban
Heating

Business
Travel

Total
Emissions
inc. Hotels
(Tons
CO2e)

Waste (Nonhazardous)

Other Europe

32,760

691

95

2,663

7,735

0

22,843

34,026

172

Asia & Australia

2,657

0

0

474

1,554

0

6,579

8,607

0

Latin America

32,580

2

2

223

9,517

0

4,478

14,223

78

Other Sogeti

1,761

0

0

0

297

0

840

1,138

8

Total - Other Operations

69,758

693

37

3,361

19,103

0

34,740

57,993

259

Total - Largest Operations

337,132

1,429

7,345

64,757

90,529

187

116,089

280,337

1,474

Grand Total

406,889

2,122

7,442

68,118

109,632

187

150,829

338,330

1,724

Notes:
Hungary,
Italy,
Mexico,
Philippines,
Poland,
Portugal,
Romania,
Slovakia,
Sweden,
Vietnam as well as Sogeti
1. Other Europe
includes
Belgium,Norway,
Czech Republic,
Denmark, Finland,
Germany,
Hungary, Italy,
Norway, Poland,
Romania, Spain,
Portugal, Spain,
Swedenand
and Slovakia;
2. Australia and Asia includes Australia; China & Hong Kong; Philippines and Vietnam;
operations
in Belgium,
Finland,
Luxemburg,
Spain,
and
3. Latin America includes
Argentina,
Brazil, Brazil
CPM Braxis, Chile,
Guatemala
andSweden.
Mexico;
4. Other Sogeti includes Sogeti operations in Finland, Belux (Belgium and Luxemburg), Spain and Sweden
5. Emission factors as produced by the Carbon Neutral Company have been used to calculate the emissions associated with hotel nights in all countries. It was identified during the external
Grenelle II audit, that these factors, when applied outside the UK, may be too high with the result that the figures presented above are likely to be higher than reality. As more appropriate
emission
factors
could
not be
obtained,
theDenmark,
figures Finland,
have been
reported
hereItaly,
as included
in the Romania,
total figure
for Business
travel (unlike
the main body of the report where hotel stays were separated
1. Other
Europe
includes
Belgium,
Czech
Republic,
Germany,
Hungary,
Norway, Poland,
Portugal,
Spain, Sweden
and Slovakia;
out for audit). It is acknowledged that the figures represent a likely worse case and the methodology employed will be reviewed for future reports.
2. Australia and Asia includes Australia; China & Hong Kong; Philippines and Vietnam;
3. Latin America includes Argentina, Brazil, Brazil CPM Braxis, Chile, Guatemala and Mexico;
4. Other Sogeti includes Sogeti operations in Finland, Belux (Belgium and Luxemburg), Spain and Sweden
5. E
 mission factors as produced by the Carbon Neutral Company have been used to calculate the emissions associated with hotel nights in all countries. It was identified during the external Grenelle II audit, that these factors, when
applied outside the UK, may be too high with the result that the figures presented above are likely to be higher than reality. As more appropriate emission factors could not be obtained, the figures have been reported here as
included in the total figure for Business travel (unlike the main body of the report where hotel stays were separated out for audit). It is acknowledged that the figures represent a likely worse case and the methodology employed
will be reviewed for future reports.

43

More information about our services,
offices and research is available at www.capgemini.com
Contact Details:
James Robey, Group Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Director
Capgemini Group, Place de l’Étoile, 11 rue de Tilsitt, 75017, Paris, France

About Capgemini
With more than 130,000 people in 44 countries, Capgemini is
one of the world’s foremost providers of consulting, technology
and outsourcing services. The Group reported 2012 global
revenues of EUR 10.3 billion. Together with its clients, Capgemini
creates and delivers business and technology solutions
that fit their needs and drive the results they want. A deeply
multicultural organization, Capgemini has developed its own
way of working, the Collaborative Business ExperienceTM, and
draws on Rightshore®, its worldwide delivery model.
Learn more about us at www.capgemini.com.
	
Rightshore® is a trademark belonging to Capgemini
The information contained in this document is proprietary. ©2012 Capgemini. All rights reserved.
Rightshore ® is a trademark belonging to Capgemini.

