Corporate Responsibility
and Sustainability Update 2014/2015

“Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability (CR&S) is continuing
to be an increasingly important topic for our clients, our
shareholders, and our team members. Whether it is clients
adding specific environmental obligations into new contracts,
investors scrutinizing our progress on reducing our carbon
footprint and questioning our gender balance, or potential
recruits asking how we support the communities in which
we operate, expectations continue to rise.”
Hubert Giraud
Group Management Board Member
Head of People Management & Transformation
Co-Chair Capgemini Group CR&S Board

“Capgemini as a Group has been a values-driven organization
since Serge Kampf laid the foundations in 1967. Our commitment
to talented people and collaborative working with our clients has
contributed to our place as one of the most Ethical Companies in
the World by the Ethisphere Institute for the third consecutive year.
We also remain mindful of the environment where we are
committed to reducing our negative impact and look for ways
to impact positively, through our technological innovations and
transformations.”
Christine Hodgson
Chairman, Capgemini UK Plc
Co-Chair Capgemini Group CR&S Board

2

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2014/2015

A 24-strong team from Capgemini Netherlands
working together in the 2015 ‘Viking Hills Run’

Capgemini UK working in partnership with the Wildfowl &
Wetlands Trust to preserve wetlands in the UK.

3

Table of Contents
Executive Summary												5
1.	
Introduction 													8
2.	
CR&S Governance and Structure							9	
	 Extract from the CR&S Board Charter					10
	Materiality														10
3.	
Values and Ethics												13
	 Ethisphere’s World’s most Ethical Companies			 14
4.	
Environmental Sustainability 								15
	Performance													17
	Compliance														19
	Environmental Engagement								20
5.	
Community Engagement									21
	Volunteering													22
	Fundraising														22
	Pro bono														23
	Donations														24
	Supporting Mechanisms									24
6.	
People Culture													25
	Diversity and Inclusion (D&I)								25
	Group stats on D&I											27
	Diversity of Thought											28
	Employee Resource Groups								28
	Disability														29
	Engagement													29
	Learning and Development									29
Appendix A: Environmental data								32
Appendix B: Group Diversity and Inclusion Charter		 35

4

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2014/2015

Executive Summary

Welcome to the annual Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability
(CR&S) update for the Capgemini Group. This report provides an
overview of our program during 2014 and 2015 which supplements
the information presented in the CR&S section of our 2014
Group Financial Report.
Within this report we have included an overview
of our CR&S program with updates encompassing
the four dimensions of the program: Values & Ethics,
Environmental Sustainability, Community Engagement
and People Culture. The report also includes full-year
2014 environmental data.
2015 has been a pivotal year for our program with an
enhanced focus on strategic planning and governance.
January 2015 saw the inaugural meeting of the Group’s
CR&S Board under the co-chairmanship of Hubert
Giraud (Group Management Board Member and Head
of People Management & Transformation) and Christine
Hodgson (Chairman, Capgemini UK Plc). Throughout this
year, the Group CR&S Board have worked to advance
Capgemini’s strategic approach, further embedding
corporate responsibility and sustainability principles
into our business operations and practices.
Some highlights from this last year have included:

•	 Capgemini UK again being named
in The Times Top 50 Employers for women;
•	 Capgemini in Canada being named amongst
Canada’s best diversity employers;
•	 The continued extension of our environmental
programme with ISO14001 certification achieved
in India, Capgemini France and Sweden; and
•	 The launch in 2014 of our Global Community
Engagement Awards to champion the success
of our people across our Group who have made
a difference in the communities in which we live
and our business operates.
This report provides an overview of our continued
focus on Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability.
Further information can be found on our website
at www.capgemini.com/sustainability

•	Capgemini being recognized by The Ethisphere
Institute for the third year running as one of the
World’s most ethical companies;
•	 Capgemini’s continued inclusion in FTSE4Good,
Ethibel Sustainability Index (ESI) Excellence
Europe, and Vigeo Euronext Europe 120
and EuroZone 120 indices;

James Robey
Group Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Director

5

6

“Capgemini has
been reconfirmed as a
constituent of the Ethibel
Sustainability Index (ESI)
Excellence Europe since
23/03/2015.”

Capgemini Poland has
been recognized in the
European Economic
Congress’ 2015
Responsible Companies
Ranking for its quality
management of CR&S.
Earning 36th place overall
and 2nd place in the
Telecommunications,
technology, media and
entertainment sector.

In 2015, Capgemini India
were announced winners
of the highly regarded
Golden Peacock Awards
for Sustainability, for
managing natural
resources, and conserving
electricity and water.

In 2015, Capgemini became
a Rated Supplier on the
Chartered Institute of
Purchasing and Supply (CIPS)
Sustainability Index (CSI). By
displaying the mark, buyers will
know that we have been
through a rigorous,
independent online audit
endorsed by CIPS.

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2014/2015

In August 2015 MBN
(Minority Business
Network) USA magazine
named Capgemini North
America amongst its
annual Corporate 101 list,
representing the “Most
Admired Companies”
in supplier diversity.

Capgemini Poland
receiving the European
Economic Congress’
2015 Responsible
Companies Ranking

Values & Ethics
It’s about who we are and the way we do business.
Built on a foundation of our seven core values, our code of ethics underpins our corporate
culture and permeates all of our business practices, procurement behaviors and employee
welfare policies.

Environmental Sustainability
We have a deep and measured understanding of our impact on the environment.
We recognize that while we do not manufacture products, the business services we provide
can still impact the environment. We are working to reduce our environmental impacts from
energy, business travel and waste, while raising employee awareness on the critical issues of
sustainable development.

Community Engagement
We strive to have a positive impact on the communities in which we live and operate.
As a major global employer, we work both locally, nationally and internationally with charities,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and local authorities around inclusivity and skills for
the future. Around the Group, we encourage the active involvement of our team members in
community development.

People Culture
We aim to be the employer of choice for people who wish to flourish in a creative
and diverse environment. Our focus is on the professional development and well-being of
all our employees by ensuring that both our business practices and our facilities empower our
delivery excellence. We have a culture whereby we respect and value the diversity and creativity
of all our people.

7

1.	Introduction
Since Capgemini was founded in 1967, people have been at the heart of our Group’s vision and
mission to provide leading-class IT and consultancy services in a collaborative working style with our
clients. Operating in over 40 countries, Capgemini recognizes the value of its rich cultural diversity both
in terms of the innovation and thought leadership it provides its clients. The company also embraces
the need to create a diverse and inclusive working environment within which our people are able to
develop both personally and professionally, resulting in our leading-class client service.
This report provides insights into our corporate responsibility and sustainability (CR&S) program,
offering in a transparent assessment of our performance, achievements and challenges.
The review covers our operations across over 40 countries with environmental data presented for
around 97% of the Group by headcount. Throughout the report the term ‘Group’ is used to denote
Capgemini in its entirety. Where narrative is pertinent to a specific country or number of countries,
they are named.
During the preparation of the report, Capgemini acquired the US-listed technology and services
company, IGATE. While no further reference to IGATE is made in this report, the integration of CR&S in the
joint organization has already commenced and further details will be included in the 2016 reporting cycle.
The launch of the United Nation’s Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in 2015 denotes a significant
call for business to support a global co-operation on developing a more sustainable world for all. Of
the seventeen goals, five are more closely aligned with our business as a technology and professional
services orientated organization and to our existing internal programs.

In the short term, we are further investigating all seventeen goals to ensure Capgemini has identified
the material implications across our value networks. Recognizing our responsibility to contribute to
the success of these goals, strategic direction and incorporation will be governed through the Global
CR&S Board.
Capgemini will continue to support its clients through existing programs, service offerings and where
appropriate develop new tools and methodologies to drive performance and change for our clients
against their sustainable goals.

8

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2014/2015

2.	CR&S Governance
	 and Structure
As a provider of consultancy, technology and
outsourcing services, together with professional
services through our Sogeti business, Capgemini
Group’s CR&S program continues to focus on the three
key areas of Environmental Sustainability, Community
Engagement, and People Culture. Each of these pillars
is underpinned by our focus on Values and Ethics.
Leveraging the significant expertise of our
CR&S professionals around the Group, multinational working groups continue to drive the
program forward under the direction of the
Group’s Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability
Director. These international networks include:

During 2014, the executive governance of our CR&S
program was strengthened by the formation of a
specific CR&S Group Board under the chairmanship
of Christine Hodgson (Chairman of Capgemini UK)
and comprised senior executives from around the
Group including the Group Corporate Responsibility
and Sustainability Director and 14 Group Executive
Committee members providing a direct link to the main
Board. Going forward, this CR&S Board will ensure our
focus remains aligned to our business vision, maintain
consistency and ensure the uniform implementation of
our CR&S policies and initiatives across the Group, led
locally by our global network of CR&S professionals.

•	
the Ethics & Compliance Officers’ network, reporting
to the Group Chief Ethics & Compliance Officer;
•	
the Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability
Leadership network, comprising CR&S
professionals from within the Group;
•	
the global Corporate Responsibility &
Sustainability network, open to all our people;
•	
the global client-facing Sustainability
network, focusing on embedding
sustainability into client service offerings.

Additionally, we have set up country-specific
governance structures in a number of our
largest geographies. For example, Capgemini
has specific executive CR&S Boards in
Germany, India, Sweden and the UK, while
in other countries, such as France and
North America, CR&S issues are discussed
at local Executive Committee meetings.

9

Extract from the CR&S Board Charter
The Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability (CR&S) Board will provide the
executive level governance for CR&S within Capgemini. The CR&S Board will
review, debate and ultimately approve CR&S policies and practices for the Group.
For Capgemini, CR&S means taking a long-term view – it is our approach
to business that reduces our impact on the environment, contributes to the
communities in which we operate and ensures that we remain a diverse
and inclusive company. The Chair of the CR&S Board provides the linkage
to Capgemini’s Group Management Board (chaired by Capgemini’s Group
CEO) ensuring the input of the CEO and the alignment of Capgemini’s
approach to CR&S with the Group’s overall business strategy.

Materiality
In order to ensure our CR&S program remains aligned with stakeholder
expectations, an analysis of the relative importance of sustainability
aspects and issues was undertaken during 2014. This analysis,
or materiality assessment, is the result of a range of internal and
external stakeholder interviews together with desk-based research
(the AccountAbility SES1000 standard was used as a guide).
Stakeholders were identified as those with a vested interest in Capgemini.
These included representatives of our people, the International
Works Council, representatives from our investor community, senior
delivery managers, senior executives and a number of clients.

10

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2014/2015

Highest

Materiality Matrix for Capgemini

Human
Rights

Materiality of issues to our stakehoolders

Reduction of our
Carbon Footprint

Ethical
Behavior

Talent engagement
and Retention
Climate Change

Information security
and Data Protection

Supporting Clients
with CR&S Challenges

Child Labor

Energy
Security

Women’s
Empowerment

Client Satisfaction

Diversity
and Inclusion

Talent
and Skills
Training and
Development

Digital
Inclusion

Education in
Communities
Values and Ethics
Environmental Sustainability

Highest

Community Engagement
People Culture
Client Services

Materiality of issues to Capgemini
Capgemini Materiality Matrix 2014/2015
The materiality matrix above presents the findings of Capgemini’s materiality assessment across the CR&S pillars of
Environmental Sustainability, Community Engagement and People Culture with Values and Ethics, and Client considerations
cutting across all three. Material issues are positioned in the above matrix based upon the views of external stakeholders
(for the Y axis positioning) and internal stakeholders (for the X axis positioning).

11

Values and Ethics issues

Of highest priority (top right box) were our “ethical behaviors”
and approach to “human rights.” Addressing these
important concerns, Capgemini has a long-standing Group
Values and Ethics program. The issue of “child labor” was
highlighted as less material due to the professional services
and IT industry sector which requires a highly skilled and
educated workforce thus dramatically reducing the use
of child and unskilled labor. In addition, our sustainable
principles for procurement explicitly outlaw the use of child
labor within our supply chain.

Environmental issues

The positioning of the “climate change” issue and the
associated “reduction of our carbon footprint” (top left)
reflects the increasing importance that external stakeholders
are placing on these issues and supports the increased
focus on these items being driven within Capgemini’s
Environmental Sustainability program. The lower prioritization
of these items by internal stakeholders reflects the perception
that these aspects are less important for the professional
services sector which does not manufacture or extract
anything. As a consequence, the CR&S program has started
to raise awareness through the CR&S Group Board using
external expectations such as the CDP and Dow Jones
Sustainability Index (DJSI) to identify and communicate the
drivers. As a result, for example, in 2015, the business case
to roll-out our smart metering solution across key Capgemini
geographies progressed to pilots in France, Netherlands,
Germany and Poland.

People related issues

Internally, in line with our People Culture program, a great
deal of material importance was placed on “Talent
engagement and retention” by both internal and external
stakeholders (top right). Other aspects such as “Diversity
& Inclusion” and “Training & Development” were identified
as materially important by internal stakeholders (middle
right), reflecting their proximity to the internal nature of
these issues. “Women’s empowerment” was viewed as
moderately material by all parties (center box). As training
and development is a priority of our Learning & Development
function, which is governed by the HR department and
therefore is not reported at length within this report.
Diversity and inclusion and women’s empowerment are an
integral part of our People Culture stream within the overall
CR&S program, and we believe that addressing these issues
ensures that Capgemini is a fair and authentic place to work,
which will, in turn, address the engagement and retention of
our talented people.

12

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2014/2015

Community issues

Community related issues received a mixed review with the
“Education of Communities” viewed as having limited material
importance by external stakeholders and moderate importance
by internal stakeholders (lower middle). “Digital inclusion” was
viewed as slightly more material externally, with contributing
to the “Talent and Skills” of the community viewed as more
materially important by all parties (middle box, far right). Our
Community Program is aligned to the importance of talent and
skills with the themes of education and development being
identified as key, in recognition of the skills and talent Capgemini
can both offer now and will need in the future.

Client services related issues
“Client satisfaction” is viewed as materially important internally
as we strive to provide best-in-class services and viewed with
moderate to high importance to our external stakeholders
(middle right). “Information security and Data Protection”
(top, middle) is viewed as highly material to our stakeholders,
which reflects the growing importance of this area. Internally,
although it’s of high importance it is not viewed as material
as it is considered to be an integral part of what we do as
business as usual. However, at Group level, to reflect the
external view, 2014 saw the creation of a key initiative, Cyber
Security and Information Protection (CySIP), to better align
the 2,500 cyber security experts Capgemini has globally and
provide structure both internally and externally for our clients.
A Chief Security Officer has been appointed to work across
the Group along with a dedicated Cyber Security Lead.

The positioning of the “Supporting clients with CR&S
challenges” (middle left) reflects the increasing importance
external stakeholders are placing on this issue. The importance
seen internally reflects the delivery focus of the organization
whereby we collaborate with clients for a specific service. One
example of our client focused work is iBabs in the Netherlands
where we have, in conjunction with iBabs B.V., helped develop
and implement a solution that supports paperless meetings. By
the end of 2014, more than 300 customers with over 150,000
users were benefiting from iBabs.
We have concentrated on these areas to inform the CR&S
program and also for the purposes of our CR&S reporting.
Further refinement of the alignment of our CR&S program
with the business will continue throughout 2015.

3.	Values and Ethics

Our Ethics & Compliance Program was launched
in 2009 by the Group Board of Directors. This
program is based on our ethical culture, which has
been a core part of the Group since its creation.
As part of this program, a network of Ethics &
Compliance Officers is in place, with a Code of
Business Ethics, an Anti-corruption Policy and
a Competition Law Policy also in place to assert our
values in every country in which we operate. All new
recruits are expected to comply with the principles
of these three fundamental documents, and follow
an e-learning training course on each one.
The Ethics & Compliance program contributes
to attracting, developing, and retaining talented
people. The company-wide Group Employee
Survey, conducted annually, shows that the
commitment of our people is strongly linked to
belonging to a group with an ethical culture.
Achieving commitment and creating an ethical
environment strengthen our reputation, help us
to win new business and allow us to take our
place amongst the leaders in our industry.

Human Rights
As identified by our assessment of materiality, our stakeholders
have raised the issue of Human Rights specifically as being
of importance to Capgemini and our business. Work has
therefore commenced to review the Code of Business
Ethics which was previously considered to implicitly show
the Group’s stance on Human Rights, coupled with our
allegiance to the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights.

For further details of our Ethics & Compliance Program,
please visit our website at www.capgemini.com

13

Ethisphere’s World’s
most Ethical Companies
Capgemini has been named one of the World’s most Ethical Companies for 2015
by the Ethisphere Institute for the third consecutive year. This award recognizes
our longstanding commitment to company-wide ethical leadership, compliance
practices and corporate responsibility. It also highlights our commitment to
leading ethical business standards and practices, ensuring long-term value
to key stakeholders around the world including clients, our people, suppliers,
regulators and investors. During 2015 we saw the retirement of our long standing
Chief Ethics and Compliance Officer, Herve Canneva. In October, 2015, Philippe
Christelle, the Group Chief Audit Officer since 1999, was entrusted with the
responsibility to maintain and reinforce Capgemini’s standing as one of the
world’s most ethical companies.

“This prestigious recognition by the Ethisphere
Institute acknowledges Capgemini’s core values
of maintaining a high standard of corporate ethics
and compliance. We are proud to be honored as
one of the World’s Most Ethical Companies for
2015 and will continue to ensure that the culture
of ethics is at the heart of our organization.”

Hervé Canneva,
Former Chief Ethics and
Compliance Officer (to 2015)

14

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2014/2015

4.	Environmental Sustainability
The identification of Capgemini’s material environmental impacts has resulted
from the materiality assessment (as described in the Introduction), local initial
environmental reviews (IERs) as part of country ISO 14001 certification and other
actions, as, in the case of the UK, an independent Climate Change Risk Assessment
and in the case of the Netherlands, the CO2 performance ladder program and Multi
Year Program (MYP). Whereas the materiality assessment highlighted the importance
of climate change to our stakeholders and the need to reduce our carbon footprint,
the IERs provided greater granularity relating to these impacts, including:
•	 Our use of energy (electricity, gas and diesel);
•	 Our use of various forms of business travel;
•	 The amount and type of waste from our offices;
•	 The services and goods we procure through our supply chain; and’
•	 The direct and indirect greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from
	 our business operations.

As a professional services organization, our most significant environmental impacts
result from our business travel, office energy use and the energy required to run our
data centers. Across our global operations, ten countries house data centers whilst
the remaining country operations will impact the environment through business travel,
office energy consumption and associated emissions.
Capgemini has made significant progress in a number of our larger countries by
headcount in delivering both environmental performance and compliance initiatives.
Based on this experience a centralized approach has been developed that will further
drive progress in our remaining geographies. The program will focus on consolidating
the delivery and innovation expertize within the Group to provide the platform for
a focus on Environmental Performance, Compliance and Engagement.

15

In September 2015, colleagues at our facility in Sureness, France
collected more than 50kg of honey from hives set up in 2014.

16

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2014/2015

Performance
Overall Emissions
Our global carbon accounting and management
service, covering over 97% of our global operations
by headcount in 2014, has allowed us to standardize
our data collection and carbon management,
resulting in more robust auditable data. Due to the
size of our operations, our baseline remains subject
to change as we streamline and mature the datagathering procedures around the Group. During 2015,
following approval from the CR&S Board, we started
the compilation of global carbon emission reduction
targets to be validated and authorized in time for their
launch in 2016.
The environmental data as presented in the 2014
Annual Report have been taken from the Carbon
Accounting and Sustainability Reporting system and
cover 28 countries (Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada,
China, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Guatemala, India, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway, Philippines,
Poland, Romania, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
UK, the US and Vietnam) covering 97% of Group
headcount. Details of the 2014 full-year emissions can
be found in the 2014 Group Registration Document,
Annual Financial Report. The total emissions
reported here and in the appendices matches
the verified data included in the 2014 Group
Registration Document, with two exceptions where
we have added estimates for completeness:
1.	 An additional row has been added for ‘Rest of
World’ – this is an estimate of the emissions
associated with the 3% of headcount which
we do not currently gather data for which has
estimated on the basis of the emissions per
head in all regions which we have data for.
2.	 We have estimated F-gas emissions for regions
where this data is unavailable (currently only four
regions have robust data on F-gas emissions).
As a result of an expansion in our carbon reporting,
the countries covered by our carbon accounting
service reported emissions of 328,627 tCO2e, which
represents a 4.9% increase in overall emissions.

However, a like-for-like comparison of the emissions
of our largest operations (India, France, the
Netherlands, North America, and the UK), excluding
waste and water, shows a reduction of 3.9% since
2013 (from 274,946 tCO2e to 264,209 tCO2e). In
addition, between 2013 and 2014 the Group cut
its greenhouse gas emissions per head by around
15%, (from 2.7 tCO2e/head to 2.3 tCO2e/head).
As mentioned above, we have also included
an estimation of 8,757 tCO2e to cover the 3%
of our operations by headcount which we do
not currently gather data for. This brings the
total 2014 Group emissions to 337,429 tCO2e.
Tables of data can be found in Appendix A.
Travel
Travel will continue to present a challenge as it
contributes the largest proportion of our carbon
footprint at just over half of the global emissions
(172,952 tCO2e). Within the top six countries, 2014
emissions relating to business travel have decreased by
just over 6% as compared to 2013 (to 135,636 tCO2e).

However, through both innovation and change
Capgemini is driving a shift in behaviours through our
award-winning TravelWell – BeWell, BeSafe, BeGreen,
BeSmart program. This program looks at the whole
spectrum of sustainable employee travel ensuring we
have the right tools in place to help our people make
informed decisions whilst supporting their wellbeing
and safety and at the same time promoting being
green and smart with time and travel choices. For
example, we have increased the number of electric
vehicle charging points and perform continued reviews
of how our people can access the right choices within
our fleet of vehicles.

17

Energy consumption
The office facilities we inhabit across the Group, although
declining in number, represent a substantial proportion of
our carbon footprint (45%). However, energy consumption
is recognized as a necessity in the delivery of our client
services including powering our data centers which,
although only present in 10 of our geographies, account for
15.7% of our overall Group footprint. Of the total 376,668
MWh consumed in 2014, over 80% was consumed in our
six key countries (Canada, France, India, the Netherlands,
the UK, and the US).
The control of our estate is paramount and focused in our
ISO 14001 certified countries. Additional management
systems, like ISO 50001 in UK and the governmental MYP
in the Netherlands, support Capgemini to use energy
more efficiently and enable our work towards compliance
against various legislative requirements including the EU
Energy Directive.
Capgemini continues to monitor its energy usage with
the on-going deployment of smart meters alongside our
established carbon accounting and reporting function.
The combination of monitoring and control enables us
to identify key investment opportunities to expand our
energy efficiency program across the Group in a centralized
manner. Significant steps have been achieved in a number
of areas, such as the installation of solar panels at two of
our sites (Hyderabad in India and Aston in the UK) and the
introduction of smaller modules in our world-class data
center, Merlin, providing further optimization with reduced
energy and water requirements.

“Capgemini UK has integrated its EMS into its
overall approach to Corporate Responsibility
and carbon management strategy and so
there is excellent “line-of-sight” from the top
level objectives and corporate strategy to the
operations. An excellent example of this is
Capgemini’s TravelWell Program that takes
a holistic approach to well-being (recognizing
the demands of travel) and reducing the
environmental impacts of travel. The EMS also
exemplifies how management systems can
be in a collaborative working and partnership
approach with key Facilities Management
service providers to implement environmental
solutions and improve performance”
Graham Wood, DNV GL
18

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2014/2015

Capgemini India winning the
coveted Eco Corporate of the Year
Award at the prestigious Yes Bank
Natural Capital Awards

In 2015 Capgemini India was awarded the Eco Corporate of the
Year Award (Services category) in the Yes Bank Natural Capital
Awards which reward and showcase organizations dedicated
to environmental stewardship. The award was in recognition of
Capgemini India’s Smart Energy Management Solution which
was deployed across major Capgemini India locations in 2014.
This project helped Capgemini India reduce its carbon
footprint by 2% over the past 1 year and enabled overall
energy savings of more than 10% or approx 3.5 million
energy units in the Mumbai offices alone.
Capgemini India has showcased remarkable progress in
the sphere of environment management systems. The
organization has set clear SMART objectives, one of them
being the reduction of water consumption by 20% within
3 years, and specific action plans to accomplish these
objectives are really commendable.

“It is indeed a pleasure to
work with the Capgemini
team to realize its vision
of excellence in the
space of Environment
Management.”
Mini Sharma,
Director Operations, BSi

Total emissions 2014
2%

54%

44%

0%

29%

55%

16%

Scope 1

Waste

Scope 2

Data center

Scope 3

Office
Travel

Waste
Whilst not materially significant and currently
accounting for just 0.2% of our carbon footprint,
waste remains a focus area for Capgemini, in terms of
office and electronic waste. Moving forward, we are
also working towards a greater understanding of the
waste created in the production, transportation and
end of life of the products we consume through our
Sustainable Procurement activities and channeled
through Capgemini’s Supplier Standards.

Compliance
Capgemini is well positioned to respond to the growing
expectations from our management, our people,
our clients, investors and governments with worldleading best practices in environmental management.
A recognition of these growing expectations has
resulted in the development of our long-term Groupwide strategy that will leverage best practices and
support all countries we operate within, to create
a positive environmental impact in the longer term.

To date, Capgemini has implemented ISO 14001
certified Environmental Management Systems (EMS)
in Belgium, Brazil, Finland (data centers), France,
India, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, and the
UK, with Sweden as the latest accomplishment in
2015. India is the largest Capgemini delivery center
to have achieved the Environmental Management
certification and its inclusion increases the percentage
of operations covered by the standard to nearly
60% of the Group. During 2015, plans for ISO 14001
certification have been put in place in our operations
in North America and Guatemala and Germany.
Our ambition is to have the top ten countries by
headcount certified to the standard by 2017 and all
other countries where our operations are greater
than a thousand people by headcount by 2020.
The Capgemini Group Center of EMS Expertize was
set up during 2014 including the development of a
Group EMS platform. This enables us to combine the
efficiency of a standard and consistent global way
of working with locally focused delivery.

19

Environmental
Engagement
With more than 50% of our current carbon footprint
associated with business travel, there is huge potential
for our own people to contribute to reductions through
smart business travel options. Reductions in the carbon
and associated cost of business travel in the service
of our clients is possible through the efficient use of
alternative technologies we have made available, for
example, video conferencing and instant communicator
tools. In addition, our people are encouraged to
reuse and recycle before disposing of waste.
The following are three examples from around our
Group where we have engaged with our people
regarding our environmental responsibilities:
Brazil
The extraordinary exhibition entitled “Is e-waste really
waste?”at Capgemini Brazil’s Cultural Center in Sao Paolo is
an inspiring example of creating awareness about disposal
of electronic waste. Since 2012, Capgemini Brazil has
applied inventory management to monitor the lifecycle of its
computers and laptops, from purchase planning through
to disposal. The exhibition includes sculptures of robots,
motorcycles, airplanes, and animals, together with portraits
of various famous characters including Frankenstein,
made entirely out of e-waste by several Brazilian artists.
During the visit, people are introduced to two opposing
concepts – beauty and gloom. While beauty leads visitors
through a path of sculptures entirely created from obsolete
electronic components, a gloomier path reveals the impact
of their improper disposal on the environment and people.

20

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2014/2015

India
In 2014, Capgemini India celebrated its first Jashn, the
Celebration of Excellence Together; the annual cultural
festival of Capgemini India spread across seven locations,
with a fun and zero waste event for around one thousand
people. During the party, volunteers segregated the
plastic and paper waste from the food waste. The plastic
waste was transported to recycling units and food waste
went to bio-gas recycling plants. In total, around 20% of
the party waste was recycled. As one of the volunteers
stated: “Thanks for making my first Jashn at Capgemini
memorable. It made me proud to be a Capgeminian.”
Belgium
Capgemini Belgium won the Clean Fleet of the Year 2015
award in the category of companies with more than 250
cars, with an average CO² emission of 108,63 g/km. It was
the first time the award was given to fleet owners making
best efforts to achieve a clean fleet inside their companies.
Capgemini Belgium also doubled the donations of our
people for the ‘Forest for Everyone’ initiative of Natuurpunt
Vlaanderen, resulting in the planting of 250 new trees.
Netherlands
A number of our colleagues in Capgemini Netherlands
participated in a travel project which encourages a change
in behavior relating to travel, to reduce the associated
carbon footprint. Sixty of our people took part in ‘From5to4’
which challenges people to travel for one day per week by
a mode of transport which does not involve a car. Others
received personal advice from an external MobilityCoach.
Based on the success of the project multiple information
sessions regarding possible travel arrangements and
alternative options are now planned throughout the year.

5.	Community Engagement
“As a responsible business,
we recognize our obligations to
society and the role we can play
in helping to tackle social issues.
Capgemini collaborates with
non-governmental organizations
to improve the lives of people
around the world. We encourage
our 180,000 passionate people to
contribute their professional skills
and expertise, and their personal
time and energy to support the
many and diverse communities in
which they live and work.”

Christine Hodgson
Chair, Capgemini Group
Corporate Responsibility
& Sustainability Board

We recognize that we have a responsibility
to support the communities in which we
live and operate in more than 40 countries.
As a people-centered organization, our
community strategy reflects our desire to
leverage the skills, technical capabilities
and passion of our people in the areas of
education and development. These are
the two key themes which underpin our
work and which see us collaborate with
charities, governments and businesses in
the private sector.
We understand that our commitment
to education and development not only
helps the next generation, but is also
a key contributor to economic growth
and wellbeing around the world. We
also believe that we are contributing to
the reduction of potential longer-term
skills gaps in our own industry sector.
Our strategic aim within the area of
development is to provide skills and
expertise to the communities in which our
people live and operate, in such a way that
those communities and the individuals
of which they comprise are assisted to
develop and grow.
Our Community Engagement Program
delivers value through volunteering,
fundraising, donations and pro bono work.

21

Volunteering
In Capgemini we understand that volunteering, where
our people, of any grade, donate time and skills to
tackle local social issues, is an effective and powerful
way to contribute to local communities, whilst also
being of significant benefit to the volunteers themselves.
In 2014 we focused on developing our people skills
and promoting volunteering around the Capgemini
Group as illustrated in the following examples.

Did you know?

Example 1 – Education
In Capgemini France around 300 of our people
are engaged in the project Passeport Avenir which
provides voluntary mentorship through associations with
engineering or management schools and universities
for individual student coaching. Over 300 young people
have been supported since the scheme’s launch, to
develop their professional skills and employability.
“Passeport Avenir is a huge opportunity for improving selfconfidence through working with mentors who believe in
us and who by their assistance and their advice make us
achieve things that we didn’t otherwise believe possible”
M’Bark Haïnouss, beneficiary of the Capgemini
mentorship program as mentored by René Charles
Tisseyre KM Manager CAPGEMINI FS GBU France.

In 2014 Marek Grodziński, Head of Capgemini’s
European BPO Delivery Centers and Board
Member of Capgemini Poland, was honored with
a Silver Cross of Merit (Srebrny Krzyż Zasługi) by the
Polish Government, for his philanthropic activities.

Fundraising
At Capgemini we believe that fundraising for local
communities should be innovative and effective,
resulting in significant impact for the local community.
Our people’s propensity for giving is remarkable,
with many employee-led initiatives across our Group
raising money for causes close to their hearts. The
following are but two examples of such giving, one
with an educational focus and one developmental.

Example 2 – Development
Atlanta Ronald McDonald House is a charity that
provides a home away from home for up to 50 families
with ill and injured children who must travel to receive
treatment at hospitals in the Atlanta area. Together with
our client, Coca-Cola Company, Capgemini employees
organized a full day of service including cleaning
the rooms, halls, and bathrooms, cooking breakfast
and lunch, cleaning the grounds and performing
various outdoor tasks as well as fundraising.

22

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2014/2015

Example 1 – Education
Since 2005, Capgemini has been working with the
Naandi Foundation on the “Nanhi Kali” program, which
focuses on supporting the education of girls in the Indian
state of Maharashtra. In 2014,
Capgemini people from 11
countries contributed to the
support of 6,765 school girls.
In order to address the critical importance of the 9th and
10 th academic years for girls in India, in which future
job opportunities are improved, Capgemini expanded
its involvement in the Naandi Foundation’s Last Lap
Program. This program focuses on the support of
girls studying in the 9th and 10th grades through extra
tutorial support, stationery and career guidance. Girls
from four schools were supported by 34 Capgemini
volunteers in addition to the existing school hours.

Pro bono
Pro bono work, where Capgemini employees
undertake their professional work without payment
in service of the community, forms part of our overall
Community strategy. The two examples, as illustrated,
showcase developmental pro bono endeavors.

“We initially ran this as pilot. However, the results were
outstanding. We saw an increase of over 35% in the
academic score, with the top 10% of school performers
being our students from the Last Lap Program.”
Dhanashree Page; Capgemini India CR&S Coordinator
Example 2 – Development
In autumn 2014, floods caused massive destruction in
the Jammu and Kashmir regions of India, displacing
hundreds of families. Capgemini volunteers responded
immediately, organizing relief material collection,
transport and fundraising across all our Indian
offices. €300,000 was raised to provide critical
shelter, water, cooking, and hygiene support.

Example 1 – Education
In 2014, Capgemini Poland supplied a project team
including project management, communications, marketing
and branding, public relations and media and translation
services to support the organization of a charity race on
behalf of Jasiek Mela’s Beyond Horizons Foundation. The
race involved 10,000 runners across five cities and raised
money for prosthesis in support of amputees whose lives
have been drastically changed due to accident or disease.
Example 2 – Development
In recognition of the high levels of unemployment in
Amsterdam, our people in Capgemini Netherlands have
designed and implemented, in conjunction with one of
our clients, the Seniors for Talents program. This program
provides senior Capgemini management in a coaching
and mentoring capacity to work closely with highly
educated young people (30 in 2014) to assist in finding
employment or further training and development.

Did you know?

Did you know?

Since 2010, Capgemini people have helped
micro-entrepreneurs around the world develop
their small businesses by providing online loans
through the MicroWorld platform. The Capgemini
developed and maintained MicroWorld platform and
website is an online community that links lenders
from seven countries to microfinance institutions
(MFIs) and, ultimately, to entrepreneurs who need
capital. In 2014, 531 projects were supported
by 23 lenders from Capgemini. Throughout
the duration of the Program, 1,900 projects
have been supported by over 600 lenders
We are currently working with MicroWorld to enlarge
the scope of support that our people can offer through
the platform, via skills sharing, tutoring, mentoring
and volunteering opportunities and as a result, hope
to increase the number of potential beneficiaries.

Dawley Town Hall
Capgemini UK has been reaccredited with
a prestigious Big Tick by its national community
partner, Bus iness in the Community. The accolade
was awarded for our work with Dawley Town
Hall, in Telford, where we service one of our
large Government accounts. The Hall re-opened
as the town’s public venue for arts, social and
cultural activities in January 2014 and the local
Member of UK Parliament joined
our people for the Hall’s first
anniversary celebrations a year
later. The project won the Best
Community Innovation award in
the Capgemini Group’s inaugural
Global Community Engagement Awards last year,
news which reached more than 140,000 colleagues
worldwide. The story was also publicised in
Telford’s local newspaper, the Shropshire Star.

“My life is like a fairy tale,” says Hasan Fayzulloev,
whose rural life with three young children and an
old house inherited from parents in Tajikistan,
is within the poorest region of the former Soviet
Union. The development of this area relies
heavily on micro finance and with €465 from
Capgemini sourced loans, Hasan was able to
create and sustain a profitable husbandry.

23

Donations
Pro bono work, where Capgemini employees Corporate Donations in 2014
Countries

Donations

Programs

North America

65 432 €

France

307 570 €

UK & Ireland
NL
India

61 734 €
71 360 €
82 570 €

22k€ United Way, 11k€ Mental Health Association Of New Yorkcity Inc, 8k€ Boys & Girls
Clubs Of Metro Atlanta, 5k€ Us Sciences Po Foundation, 5k€ Naandi
96k€ for disability programs and 126k€ for CSR programs (50k€
Passport Avenir, 45k€ Women’s forum, 15k€ students in Lille University and 15k€ Ekodev
for bees), 85k€ Microworld
41k€ Naandi
20k€ Naandi, 30k€ St. Opkikker Super Opkikkerdag, 21k€ St. Opkikker website
22,7k€ Capgemini Scholarship for Technical Education, 19,6k€ Bal Raksha Bharat,
16k€ SAHAAS, 6k€ Lila Poonawalla foundation for the education sponsorship of 12 girls

Largest operations sub-total
Nordics countries
South Europe

588 666 €
98 218 €
265 848 €

Germany and central Europe

17 837 €

7k€ Managers of the Future Foundation MOFFIN (Poland), 8k€ Germany

Asia Pacific & Latam

19 229 €

4k€ Naandi (Australia), 2,5k€ GMA Kapuso Foundation,
Inc.(Philippines),

TOTAL

989 799 €

71k€ Naandi, 13k€ Mentor International, Sweden
102k€ Adecco fundation, 95k€ PlanetFinance (Italy), 25k€ Fundación Catalana Síndrome
de Down (FCSD), 25k€ CADIN (Portugal)

Supporting Mechanisms
In 2014 we launched the Global Community
Engagement Awards to champion, recognize and
celebrate the success of our people who go above
and beyond to make a difference to the communities
in which we live and operate – adding value to our
brand and to our business.
The awards operate under five categories:
•	 Volunteer Initiative of the Year

Capgemini Germany competing
in the JP Morgan Corporate Challenge

•	 Best Fundraising Award
•	 Community Innovation Award
•	 Client Collaboration Award
•	 The People’s Choice Award
In total, 139 entries were received from 17 of our
Group’s countries. In this, our first global competition
of its kind, over 7,000 of our people voted for their
choice in the ‘People’s Choice’ award. The 2015
awards have been launched with winners to be
announced during Community Week in November.

Capgemini North America showing that ‘Capgemini Cares’ which is
a regional day of service initiative run each year. In 2015, more than
1,300 Capgemini people took part, supporting 37 charities.

24

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2014/2015

6.	People Culture
At Capgemini, we take pride in being a multinational
organization, where people from various countries,
ethinicities, educational backgrounds, economic
backgrounds, abilities and genders, work towards
clear objectives and in turn fulfill their ambitions.
For Capgemini, people orientation is as important as
achieving business sustainability, a fact epitomized
by our corporate byline ‘People
Matter, Results Count’.
Our People Culture Program consists
of three main areas of focus:
•	 Diversity and Inclusion (D&I);
•	 Engagement;
•	 Learning and Development.

Diversity
and Inclusion (D&I)
Capgemini is committed to creating an inclusive
workplace culture that provides our people with the
opportunity for a successful and rewarding career.
As stated in our global Diversity and Inclusion Charter,
see Appendix B, we believe that it is the factors
that make people different which offer valuable
sources of innovation and creativity, enabling us

to generate new ideas, anticipate market trends
and be thought leaders in our chosen markets.
Our holistic definition of diversity extends beyond
gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, disability,
ethnicity, race, age and religion. Capgemini
views diversity as everything that makes us who
we are as an organization, including our social
background, our experiences in life and work, our
communication styles, and even our personality.
These dimensions contribute to the type of diversity
we value the most: diversity of thought.
Based on this definition we worked to develop
key performance indicators that would assess our
progress through a multi-layered lens to understand
the voice of our people, our position in the market,
the accountability of leaders at every level, and
our current demographics. D&I indicators are in
place to develop engagement, business value
and go beyond our compliance requirements.
As an example, to illustrate our strategy, we are
currently focusing on addressing balance at top
management level and have ensured that recent
promotions correspond to our vision of diversity
(e.g. we had a 5% increase in global female
promotions to Vice President from 2013 to 2014).

25

Capgemini UK has been named in The
Times Top 50 Employers for Women for
the fourth consecutive year.
The unranked list published in
partnership with Opportunity Now
(the workplace gender campaign from
Business in the Community) contains
organizations who are leading
on workplace gender equality.

“I’m very pleased that Capgemini UK is
once again included in The Times Top 50
Employers for Women. It is testament to our
commitment to widening the talent pool we
recruit from and supporting women’s career
progression. I’m excited we are part of this
positive change that the wider technology
industry is going through.”
A delighted Christine Hodgson,
Executive Chairman
of Capgemini UK

“Congratulations to Capgemini on being
included in The Times Top 50 Employers for
Women 2015. They have recognized that
putting inclusive behaviors at the core of
what they do and making gender equality a
business priority not only benefits the women
they employ, but also the organization as
a whole and the clients, customers and
communities they serve. Their dedication
and commitment to driving change should
educate and inspire other employers to make
a difference, whatever their size or sector.”
Kathryn Nawrockyi, Opportunity
Now Director, Business
in the Community

26

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2014/2015

Capgemini Canada has been
recognized by Canada’s
Best Diversity Employers for
our exceptional workplace
diversity and inclusiveness
program. This competition
recognizes successful
diversity initiatives in a variety
of areas, including programs for employees from five groups:
(a) Women; (b) Members of visible minorities; (c) Persons
with disabilities; (d) Aboriginal peoples; and (e) Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual and Transgendered/Transsexual (LGBT) peoples.
Of particular note was Capgemini’s Unconcious Bias training.
In 2015, Capgemini India underwent voluntary benchmarking
to evaluate its diversity effort, by the not for profit organization
WILL, which focusses on building gender balance at
leadership level. “Data is a remarkable way of bringing facts
to the table,” says Gayarthri Ramamurthy, Diversity Lead,
Capgemini India, who went on to say that ”The
benchmarking exercise showed us that we were heading
in the right direction, but also identified that there was a lot
more to be done.”

During 2015 Capgemini participated in the Diversity Value
Index (DVI) in an attempt to benchmark and identify what
impacts diversity and inclusion have on learning and business.

“An outstanding application; this organization
recognizes the need for diversity and does
all it can to achieve it. One of the strongest
applications I have read.” DVI, 2015
Overall comments
from the judges

Group stats on D&I
Headcount
145000

143,643

135000
131,430

125000

125,110

115000

Total Headcount

2012

2013

2014

Percentage Female

Age range of Capgemini

and Male headcount 2014

People 2014

28%

12%

Female
Male

4%

13%

24%

<25
25-34
35-44
45-54
55+

47%

72%

Age Groups

Women in highest levels of responsibility
16,0%

15,0%

14,5%

15,3%

15,5%

13,0%
11,5%
10,0%
2012

2013

2014

27

Diversity of Thought
With operations in over 40 countries, a variety of different
cultures are represented throughout the organization.
The background and experiences of our people,
influenced by many differing social norms within those
countries may introduce, unconsciously, certain biases.
These are not necessarily right or wrong, good or bad,
but uncovering them leads each of our people to better
understand others, ensure more effective and higherperforming teams and encourage diversity of thought.
We continue to build awareness through Unconscious
Bias training to mitigate against any behaviors which may
impact our ability to build highly effective teams through
recruitment, engagement, development, and retention.
Capgemini believes that the diversity of its people is a real
competitive advantage. The Group therefore seeks to build
a workforce embracing these wide varieties of profiles,
experiences, and cultures. By making project teams more
diverse, Capgemini can better understand the requirements
of end users and partner more collaboratively with our clients.
At the end of 2014, 42% of our Corporate and Senior
Vice President community had undergone
Unconscious Bias training.

Employee Resource Groups
Employee Resource Groups support our community
engagement through volunteering and charitable
contributions relating to causes that matter to our people,
clients and partners.
Gender Diversity as a business priority
Ensuring gender diversity at the workplace has been
one of the core objectives of the organization during the
past few years. Gender diversity in its essence strives at
ensuring equal growth opportunity and the right working
conditions for all employees, such that they would achieve
their career aspirations and personal ambitions, regardless
of their gender. We do believe in no discrimination in
deed based upon the gender of an individual, and that
opportunities must be given to deserving employees
not as a matter of obligation, but as a matter of right.
Our initiative, WinspirE, is globally aligned to
our Women@Capgemini program. The four
main goals of the global program are to:
•	 Encourage cultural change, to position gender
diversity as a business imperative;
•	 Put women at the heart of client relationships, to
show that we have a gender diverse workforce;
•	 Address HR policies, Group-wide, to create
flexible working conditions and foster equal
opportunities for women and men; and

28

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2014/2015

•	 Provide networking opportunities for people
to share best practices and experiences.
WinspirE supports women colleagues in career development
and encourages them to take on new responsibilities and
leadership roles. It acts as a network offering a strong
support system, both professionally and personally,
where we help Recruit, Retain, Develop and Build
Awareness about gender diversity in the workplace.

Our 4 Pillars to promote
equal opportunities
and equal chances

RECRUIT
To ensure every position in Capgemini
is gender independent.

RETAIN
Enable through sensitizing environment and
facilities for women at pre and post natal
phase and create networking forums for
support and learning.

DEVELOP
Enable holistic development of our women,
through mentoring and personal branding
within and outside the organization.

CORPORATE
AWARENESS
Ensure strong commitment and role model from
Group leaders and work on unconscious bias on
gender diversity.

Disability
As part of an expanding diversity program, Capgemini
Poland is welcoming visually impaired people to their team.
In collaboration with the Managers of Future Foundation,
in 2014 the center in Poland conducted a pilot project
targeted at two positions: Recruitment Specialist (BPO)
and Quality Assurance Specialist (Infra). In 2015 there were
three visually impaired people employed in Poland, working
with assistive technologies in the office. “Real inclusion
of persons with disabilities requires not only workplace
adaptation but also raising awareness and overcoming
communication barriers – by both disabled people starting
their work practice and the teams. We’ve put in a lot
of effort to provide both of them with quality training.”
– Karolina Długosz, Global Community Engagement.
The long-term objective is to build an employment
model for visually impaired people and to promote
economic activity among this group of people.

Engagement
People Culture Week
A week of focused activities
was held across the Group and
over social media in March 2015
which aimed to articulate our
definition of People Culture, to
raise awareness of unconscious
bias and how to mitigate,
and to celebrate International
Women’s Day. Sixteen of our
Group countries held dedicated
campaigns across social
media and the Group intranet, including articles from five
of our Strategic Business Units (SBUs). Over 1,500 of our
people from 27 countries joined the fun in our People
Week Quiz and contributed to over 12,000 page views.

Examples include:
Capgemini Brazil, which has been developing an
application for a nationwide project with the mission
to revitalize the federal public hospitals from Brazil by
disseminating a management model supported by
specialist software. This software was built over 20
years and is now being migrated and improved on a new
platform (Open Source), leaving the client-server model
and going to the web. Improvements include supporting
new processes and readjustment in the old processes
to meet new requirements and business changes.
Our XD team, which designed a unique Service Platform that
will enable one of our communications clients to leverage
the Internet of Things to provide services supporting clients
to become more energy efficient, to reach ambitious
sustainability goals and to improve their energy supply
processes. These data-driven services play an important role
in the future strategy of this client and combine innovative
topics such as social, mobile, analytics, and cloud (SMAC).

Learning and Development
Capgemini is a people-centered organization where we
recognize that the quality of services provided to our clients
depends on the excellence and motivation of our teams.
We therefore invest in both personal and professional
development and recognize the need for frequent updates
to knowledge and skills in a fast-paced technology sector.
Professional development is supported by our Career &
Competency Framework, which is a performance appraisal
and progression tool tailored according to the account
specific needs of each of Capgemini Group’s businesses
and Group functions. Our Learning & Development teams
provide our people with a broad range of learning sources
allowing them to further develop their capabilities.

People and Results
During 2015, the
People & Results
campaign recognized
teams and projects
who delivered
tangible results to clients and society, thereby making
a difference to the world in which we live. Teams were
invited to identify projects where individuals and teams
helped make a difference to not just clients but also wider
society or where a project was a specific social initiative.
These were then shared across the organization on posters,
adverts, and on plasma screens in reception areas, in
order to build engagement, display our values at work and
create visibility for these teams around the wider Group.

Our Approach
Capgemini University’s vision is to support our people,
bringing them together to develop their capabilities
and achieve the full potential of our Group for our
clients. It challenges, supports development, connects
our Group and brings to life our values through
formalized packages and cutting edge content using
our Next Generation Learning (NGL) approach and
Capgemini University’s Global Curriculum.

29

The University successfully went through its EFMD
(European Foundation for Management Development)
five-year reaccreditation process in 2014. Capgemini
University received its initial EFMD accreditation in 2009
and is the only Corporate University from the IT industry
to have it. The accreditation is a mechanism for quality
benchmarking, mutual learning and sharing of good
practices where internal self-assessment is combined
with an external review from experienced peers against
a comprehensive set of rigorous criteria. The EFMD stated:
“We are happy to recognize Capgemini University for
maintaining a very high level of professional quality in all its
operations, demonstrating consistent excellence through its
programs and an exemplary standard of global training.”
Our NGL approach is a very practical focused approach
which engages our people in business specific challenges
and actions. The framework is based on developing three
key attitudes needed to achieve excellence in learning:
•	 ‘Do-Learn-Do’ – is about learning through action;
•	 ‘Connect-to-Learn’ – which goes beyond team
working and looks to the value which can result
from collective contributions and networks; and’
•	 ‘Techno Fluent’ – to integrate technology in
a purposeful way as necessary in both learning and
in order to solve the challenges of our clients.
Recognizing that our people learn in different ways, the
learning and development approach is flexible to cater for all
preferences where training is delivered in a variety of ways.

Virtual Learning
In order to reach as many people any time and
anywhere, Capgemini offers our people a wide
range of virtual learning opportunities:
•	 E-learning modules offer self paced, webbased learning through courses devised as
part of the Capgemini Global Curriculum;
•	 Virtual Classroom led by an expert instructor
via web conferencing, allowing our people to
come together virtually in six-week courses;
•	 Facilitated virtual learning journeys (FVLJs) combine
a mixture of asynchronous (self learning at a person’s own
pace) and synchronous (instructor led) interventions; and’
•	 Virtual Campus (interactive virtual training environment),
games, online books and assignments.
Our virtual learning journeys have resulted
in a number of benefits including:
•	 The engagement and support of the learner throughout
the program to ensure maximum certification success;
•	 An ability to present a global program allowing
a broad reach, catering for a range of experiences;
•	 Minimal content development;
•	 An increase in speed-to-market of increased
skills enabling more efficient client support;
•	 Availability of repeatable programs through the University;
•	 Reduction in travel expenses and
associated emissions; and’
•	 Flexibility in accommodating learning within
a participant’s delivery schedule.
We are currently working on new styles and
methods of delivering virtual learning, including
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs).

30

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2014/2015

Les Fontaines and Campus Learning Events
International learning events for key talented people,
within key communities, are also organized at our
Group’s world-class campus, in Les Fontaines, Paris,
France. This facility is also highly sustainable with a focus
on energy efficiency and waste reduction. In 2014,
the campus had its European Ecolabel renewed.
International Campus Learning Events are a powerful
delivery channel to align, develop and deploy content in an
accelerated manner. New or existing content is delivered
in a consistent manner, which is then cascaded back to
the regions and countries. Additionally, these events are
an effective way to align and reinforce the engagement
of our talented people towards the Group, their Business
Units, and their communities. These events align people to
the Group ambitions, create a Group spirit and accelerate
the deployment of key skills and content to our clients.
All International Campus Learning Events organized by
Our University are positioned as a tool for alignment
and acceleration to achieve the Group’s ambitions.
Local Learning
The remainder of our learning through University
learning programs is delivered locally by
University Qualified Facilitators (UQF).
In 2014, 4.8 million learning hours were delivered to 136,000
people as part of the training path defined by Group through
the various channels as described earlier in this section.

This represents 96% of our people.
The volume of training provided by the University
was almost 3.1 million hours, representing 64%
of total learning hours taken in the Group.
Close to 35,000 employees (35% more than in 2013) were
trained at our Global Campus, Les Fontaines, in France
or locally in countries in which the Group is present,
representing 1.3 million hours of training. Virtual training now
represents 43% of total training hours with just over 2 million
hours delivered in 2014 (12% more when compared to 2013).
When asked for feedback relating to our Global curriculum,
the results indicated a positive 4.1 out of 5.0.
Mentoring
Capgemini has launched a mentoring program to provide
a pathway to help the current and next generation of women
employees rise to the uppermost levels of organizational
leadership. The program focuses on high-potential women,
who after having proved their mettle and taken charge of their
career aspirations, are now looking to grow to leadership
roles. It aims to help mentees set goals, build a positive selfesteem, learn strategies for dealing with work pressures/
stress and hone leadership and problem solving skills.
Capgemini is also partnering with the Cherie
Blair Foundation in a global external mentoring
program to support women entrepreneurs in
developing and emerging economies.

143,643
119,707

125,110

131,430

108,698

78%

2010

85%

2011

88%

2012

91%

2013

95%

2014

% of Unique Employee Trained
Headcount Total

31

Appendices

Appendix A: Environmental data
TABLE 1 GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS BY SCOPE
Scope 1 Emissions in Tons CO2e

Scope 2 Emissions in Tons CO2e

Diesel/Gas Oil

Natural
Gas

F-Gas

Office
Electricity

Data Center
Electricity

India

4,976

N/A

166

55,307

N/A

France

N/AV

38

78

2,003

93

717

336

8,143

Region

UK & Ireland

24,185

Urban Electric
Heating

Office Cooling

N/A

N/A

N/AV

N/A

N/A

N/A

Netherlands

16

401

26

2,547

6,603

16

68

North America

88

17

37

3,612

13,573

N/A

N/A

Belgium & Luxembourg

N/A

39

6

286

N/A

N/A

N/A

Germany & Central Europe

N/A

486

62

9,764

2,653

490

N/A

Nordic Countries

23

N/A

15

418

1,579

453

15

Southern Europe

N/A

344

27

2,229

N/A

N/A

N/A

Latin America

21

1

5

859

278

N/A

N/A

Asia Pacific

N/A

N/A

13

4,027

523

N/A

N/A
N/A

Morocco

N/A

N/A

3

908

N/A

N/A

5,218

2,044

774

90,103

52,226

959

83

Rest of World (estimated)

139

54

21

2,401

N/A

N/A

GRAND TOTAL
(including Rest of World)

5,357

2,099

795

92,504

959

83

GRAND TOTAL

N/A  
52,226

1.	 Data included in the tables is for the reporting period January 2014 to December 2014 (unless otherwise stated)
2.	 GHG Emissions have been calculated in line with the Greenhouse Gas Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard. “Scope” is a reporting term
from the Protocol for categorising the reporting of emissions according to the level of control a company has over an emissions source.
3.	 N/A indicates where a particular data source is not applicable for that region.
4.	 The data reported in the tables here matches with the verified data which was included in the Group Registration Document 2014, with two exceptions where
we have added estimates for completeness:
•	 An additional row has been added for ‘Rest of World’ – this is an estimate of the emissions associated with the 3% of headcount which we do not currently
gather data for. This has been estimated on the basis of the emissions per head in all regions which we have data for. The same principle has also been
applied to 2013 data.
•	 We have estimated F-gas emissions for regions where this data is unavailable (currently only four regions have robust data on F-gas emissions). This has
also been estimated on a per head basis.
5.	 All emission sources: With the exception of hotel nights (mentioned below), emissions have been calculated using the conversion factors and methodology
recommended by the DEFRA: https://www.gov.uk/measuring-and-reporting-environmental-impacts-guidance-for-businesses

32

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2014/2015

Scope 3 Emissions in Tons CO2e
Region

Business
Travel

Total Emissions in Tons CO2e

T&D Losses
(UK only)

Water Supply
& Treatment

Waste

2014 Total
(All Sources)

2013 Total
(excluding
waste & water)

% Change
from 2013

India

36,321

-

517

106

97,394

99,588

-2.2%

France

24,481

-

71

17

29,443

33,360

-11.7%

UK & Ireland

15,217

2,813

45

11

51,561

48,907

5.4%

Netherlands

30,168

-

7

41

39,892

45,383

-12.1%
-1.3%

North America

29,493

-

173

94

47,087

47,708

Belgium & Luxembourg

8,326

-

1

2

8,660

N/AV

N/A

Germany & Central Europe

11,053

-

38

93

24,639

22,594

9.0%

Nordic Countries

4,137

-

5

19

6,665

6,435

3.6%

Southern Europe

4,571

-

69

23

7,263

3,091

135.0%

Latin America

3,612

-

14

11

4,802

6,285

-23.6%

Asia Pacific

5,511

-

32

180

10,286

N/AV

N/A

62

-

5

2

980

N/AV

N/A

Morocco

172,952

2,813

976

601

328,672

313,351

4.9%

Rest of World (estimated)

GRAND TOTAL

4,608

-

26

16

8,757

47,378

-81.5%

GRAND TOTAL
(including Rest of World)

177,560

2,813

1,002

617

337,429

360,729

-6.5%

1.	 ‘T&D losses’ are emissions associated with electricity transmission and distribution losses, which have been calculated for the UK only using the emissions
factors supplied by the Department for Rural Affairs and the Environment (DEFRA).
2.	 Travel: Emission factors as produced by the Carbon Neutral Company have been used to calculate the emissions associated with hotel nights in all countries.
3.	 As recommended by DEFRA we calculate both emissions associated with water supply and emissions associated with water treatment. As the volume of water
being sent for treatment is unmetered it is assumed that the volume is the same as that being supplied
4.	 “% Change from 2013” compares the reported 2013 and 2014 “Total Emissions” data – this is not a like-for-like comparison due to the fact that 2013 data did
not cover the same countries (Belgium, Czech Republic, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Norway, Romania, Switzerland, Mexico, China, Philippines, Vietnam,
Australia and Morocco were excluded) and does not cover the same emission sources (waste and water emissions were excluded)
5.	 Please see pages 112-116 of the Group Registration Document for a further breakdown of the emissions per country.

33

TABLE 2 OTHER KEY ENVIRONMENTAL METRICS
Region

Total Energy
(All sources in
MWh)

General Waste
to Landfill
(Tons)

Waste Diverted
from landfill
(Tons)

Total Waste
(Tons)

Total Water
Use (cubic
meters)

Headcount

Emissions per
head (Tons
CO2e/head)
1.74

India

84,298

507

257

764

487,254

56,006

France

79,469

58

267

325

67,810

20,846

1.41

UK & Ireland

69,638

30

244

274

42,767

8,762

5.88

Netherlands

25,469

195

108

303

6,482

6,823

5.85

North America

44,694

473

11

483

164,177

9,874

4.77

Belgium & Luxembourg

1,508

10

3

13

568

1,724

5.02

Germany & Central Europe

25,457

460

91

551

35,865

10,300

2.39

Nordic Countries

16,032

84

129

213

4,711

3,981

1.67

Southern Europe

8,646

110

39

149

65,831

7,159

1.01

Latin America

13,724

50

55

105

13,183

10,116

0.47

Asia Pacific

6,211

877

263

1,140

30,290

3,490

2.95

Morocco

1,524

10

0

10

4,737

834

1.18

376,668

2,864

1,467

4,332

923,674

139,915

2.35

Rest of World (estimated)

GRAND TOTAL

5,472

76

39

115

24,611

3,728

2.35

GRAND TOTAL
(including Rest of World)

382,140

2,941

1,506

4,447

948,285

143,643

2.35

1.	 Data included in the tables is for the reporting period January 2014 to December 2014 (unless otherwise stated)
2.	 N/A indicates where a particular data source is not applicable for that region.
3.	 The data reported in the table here matches with the verified data which was included in the Group Registration Document 2014, with the exception of an
additional row which has been added for ‘Rest of World’ – this is an estimate of the environmental data associated with the 3% of headcount which we do not
currently gather data for.
4.	 “Total waste diverted from landfill” includes both recyclable waste which is segregated on site and waste that has been otherwise diverted from landfill by
suppliers, for example through mechanical or biological treatment

34

Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Update 2014/2015

Appendix B: Group Diversity and Inclusion Charter

Our Group Global Charter for Diversity and Inclusion sets out the Group’s commitment to:
•	 Engage with our clients, partners and suppliers to ensure there is understanding and
alignment to our values, diversity and inclusion commitments and clear expectations
•	 Recruit and retain a talented and diverse workforce to deliver
innovative, world-class solutions for our clients
•	 Foster an inclusive workplace environment that offers every
employee the opportunity for a successful career
•	 Engage employees in the diversity and inclusion agenda through communication, awareness,
education to build cultural competencies, and career development opportunities
•	 Continually review and integrate employee feedback to implement programs that
provide employee engagement opportunities and drive leadership accountability
•	 Design, implement and regularly review and update policies to ensure that we, as an organization,
are embracing diversity, cultivating inclusion, and responding to our employees’ needs
•	 Support and leverage local and global networks across the Group business
operations for employees and led by employees building communities to
drive inclusion across culture, commerce, career, and community
•	 Encourage and support our employees to consider diversity and inclusion in our everyday
business decisions (e.g. procurement, building a team, initiative sponsorship)
•	 Integrate diversity and inclusion principles into Capgemini’s business systems
and activities based on five key drivers: workplace, workforce, marketplace,
community, and executive engagement across the Group
•	 Comply with all applicable laws concerning diversity and inclusion supported through
enabling employees to obtain guidance or report concerns on compliance and misconduct
•	 Report our progress, best practices and results across the Group both internally
and externally based on our inclusion and diversity success measures
•	 Enhance Capgemini’s employer brand externally through the
promotion of our Diversity & inclusion achievements.

35

More information about our services,
offices and research is available at www.capgemini.com
Contact Details:
James Robey, Group Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Director
Capgemini Group, Place de l’Etoile, 11 rue de Tilsitt, 75017, Paris, France.

Download the CR&S app

About Capgemini
Now with 180,000 people in over 40 countries, Capgemini
is one of the world’s foremost providers of consulting,
technology and outsourcing services. The Group
reported 2014 global revenues of EUR 10.573 billion.
Together with its clients, Capgemini creates and delivers
business, technology and digital solutions that fit their needs,
enabling them to achieve innovation and competitiveness.
A deeply multicultural organization, Capgemini has developed its
own way of working, the Collaborative Business ExperienceTM,
and draws on Rightshore®, its worldwide delivery model.
Learn more about us at www.capgemini.com
 
Rightshore® is a trademark belonging to Capgemini
The information contained in this document is proprietary.
©2015 Capgemini. All rights reserved. Rightshore ® is a trademark belonging to Capgemini.

