Evolving
with changing times

Sustainability Report 2013-14

Safe Harbor
Certain statements contained herein concern our future growth prospects and are forward-looking statements regarding our future business expectations intended to qualify for
the ‘safe harbor’ under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, which involve a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially
from those in such forward-looking statements. The risks and uncertainties relating to these statements include, but are not limited to, risks and uncertainties regarding
fluctuations in earnings, fluctuations in foreign exchange rates, our ability to manage growth, intense competition in IT services including those factors which may affect our
cost advantage, wage increases in India, our ability to attract and retain highly skilled professionals, time and cost overruns on fixed-price, fixed-time frame contracts, client
concentration, restrictions on immigration, industry segment concentration, our ability to manage our international operations, reduced demand for technology in our key focus
areas, disruptions in telecommunication networks or system failures, our ability to successfully complete and integrate potential acquisitions, liability for damages on our service
contracts, the success of the companies in which Infosys has made strategic investments, withdrawal or expiration of governmental fiscal incentives, political instability and
regional conflicts, legal restrictions on raising capital or acquiring companies outside India, and unauthorized use of our intellectual property and general economic conditions
affecting our industry, volatile market scenarios and regulatory changes in the regions where we operate. Additional risks that could affect our future operating results are more
fully described in our United States Securities and Exchange Commission filings including our Annual Report on Form 20-F for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2014 and
on Form 6-K for the quarter ended December 31, 2013. These filings are available at www.sec.gov. Infosys may, from time to time, make additional written and oral forwardlooking statements, including statements contained in the company’s filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission and our reports to shareholders. Any forward-looking
statements contained herein are based on assumptions that we believe to be reasonable presently. The company does not undertake to update any forward-looking statements
that may be made from time to time by or on behalf of the company unless it is required by law.

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

“Sustainability is an economic state where the demands
placed upon the environment by people and commerce can
be met without reducing the capacity of the environment to
provide for future generations. It can also be expressed in the
simple terms of an economic golden rule for the restorative
economy : Leave the world better than you found it, take no
more than you need, try not to harm life or the environment,
make amends if you do.”

Paul Hawken
Environmentalist and Author

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

About the report
This is our seventh year of reporting on Sustainability
disclosures. Starting this year, we are publishing our disclosures
in a new integrated format encompassing economic, social and
environmental parameters. The integrated report demonstrates
the maturity of our reporting practices and addresses the growing
interest and heightened expectations of our global stakeholders.
Our reporting framework fits the broader process of setting
organizational strategy, implementing action plans, and assessing
outcomes. The integrated report includes :

The Infosys Annual Report
This report provides information on our business strategy, financial
performance and a summary of our business responsibility
principles and practices. The report complies with the mandatory
listing requirement of the Securities and Exchange Board of India
(SEBI) and is in line with the nine principles enunciated in the
National Voluntary Guidelines on Social, Environmental and
Economic Responsibilities of Business.

The Infosys Sustainability Report
This report provides detailed information on our responsible
business practices across the economic, social and environmental
parameters 'in accordance' – Comprehensive with the Global
Reporting Initiative G4 guidelines. The GRI G4 index is available
in the GRI G4 – Content Index section of this report.

The reporting boundary covers our disclosures across the Infosys
group, including subsidiaries, on the social, environmental and
economic parameters (unless otherwise stated). Starting this year
we have extended our boundary to include significant global
locations on environmental disclosures.
The Corporate Sustainability team works in collaboration with
internal and external stakeholders under the leadership of our
Executive Vice Chairman and Co-founder, S.  Gopalakrishnan to
institutionalize sustainability policies, processes and practices.
He also is responsible for reviewing and approving the organization's
Sustainability Report.
The Infosys Integrated Quality Management System assures the
quality of our sustainability practices in accordance with the
requirements of GRI G4 guidelines. The Infosys Sustainability
Report is also assured by an independent external auditor, DNV GL
represented by DNV Business Assurance India Private Limited, and
their assurance statement is available in the Independent Assurance
Statement section of this report.

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Contents
Statement from the Executive Vice Chairman .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	6

Strategic partnerships .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	43

Sustainability at Infosys .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	7

Environmental compliance .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	43

Materiality, stakeholder engagement and reporting .  .  .  . 	8

Water  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	43

Materiality matrix .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	8

Energy .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	44

Determination of aspect boundary .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	8

Emissions  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	45

Materiality aspects and scope  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	10

Data computational methods  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	47

Monitoring and reporting . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	11

Waste management  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	49

Social contract .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	13

Biodiversity .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	50

Our commitment to social contract  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	14

Eco advocacy and good citizenry .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	51

Economic performance .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	15

Green power for a sustainable future .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	52

Client value . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	15

Smarter operations – Central Command Center .  .  .  .  . 	53

Information security and data privacy  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	17

Green innovation  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	55

Intellectual property .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	18

Innovations for sustainable business  . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	56

Business continuity management . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	18

Harnessing green innovation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	57

Marketing communication and brand management .  . 	18

Improving performance through Green Data Centers .  . 	59

Compliance and anti-corruption policies  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	19

Using technology for renewable energy adoption  .  .  .  . 	59

Talent management  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	19

Using Internet of Things : Wearable computing .  .  .  .  .  . 	60

Human rights .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	25

Goals and summary .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	63

Equal opportunity  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	25

Strategic goals .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	63

Occupational health and safety  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	27

Operational goals .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	63

Responsible supply chain .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	29

Independent assurance statement  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	66

Community impact . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	32

GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	68

Infosys wins Australian CSR award  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	37

GRI materiality check .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	68

‘My School’ initiative by employees in Pune . .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	38

General standard disclosures .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	68

Resource intensity .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	39

Specific standard disclosures .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	77

Powering change through resource innovation  . .  .  .  . 	40

Acronyms  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	87

Innovation in resource conservation .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	41

Contacts .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	89

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

S. Gopalakrishnan
Executive Vice Chairman of the Board

Statement from the Executive Vice Chairman
Around this time every year, we pause to look back on what we did
in the fiscal year gone by. An important part of this exercise is to
take stock of our progress on the sustainability goals we have set for
ourselves — on economic, environmental and social parameters. It is
a time when we renew our commitment to building a sustainable
business that benefits all our stakeholders.
Our sustainability goals are part of our corporate scorecard. These goals
are further cascaded to leaders of business units and enabler functions
with the requisite authority to execute them. The ‘Management's
discussion and analysis’ section in our Annual Report highlights
strategic priorities to achieve our economic, social and environmental
goals across short, medium and long term horizons. Our Infosys
3.0 strategy is designed along a predictable, sustainable, profitable
and de-risked (PSPD) model to deliver superior value to our clients.
Our three‑pronged strategy — outsourcing services, transformative
consulting and intellectual property creation — offers us a resilient
business model.
Our sustainability strategy focuses on economic, social and
environmental aspects. We have been able to chart a clear course
of action in many areas of these three aspects. We were the first
Information and Communications Technology (ICT) Company in
India to declare a goal of becoming carbon neutral by fiscal year 2018
at the United Nations. We will do this by reducing our per capita
electricity consumption by 50%, meeting 100% of our electricity
requirements from renewable energy sources, and reducing our
carbon intensity. We have been identified as a company leading climate
change action by Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP). A score of 92
has secured us a place in the Performance Band A on the Global 500
Climate Performance Leadership Index (CPLI) and Supplier Climate
Performance Leadership Index (SCPLI).
Our annual goal to reduce fresh water consumption involves smart water
metering, rainwater harvesting and the use of water-efficient fixtures.
We have also experimented with new technologies for managing waste.
Our commitment to preserve the rich flora and fauna in and around our
development centers is powered by our biodiversity policy. This year
alone, we planted over 100,000 saplings across our campuses.
The Infosys Foundation, with its focus on healthcare, education,
culture, destitute care and rural development, continues to impact
6 | Statement of the Executive Vice Chairman

the lives of the poorest of the poor. The Infosys Prize awarded by the
Infosys Science Foundation aims to enhance the prestige of scientific
research in India and inspire young Indians to choose a vocation
in research. Our flagship industry-academia partnership program,
Campus Connect, has benefitted over 200,000 students from a large
number of engineering colleges. Education continues to be a focus
area of our CSR investments. We have also formed a CSR committee
which will formulate and monitor the CSR policy of the Company.
Infosys uses the ten principles of the UN Global Compact covering
four major dimensions — human rights, labor, environment and
anti-corruption as a good foundation for building and improving
sustainable supply chain practices. Our Sustainable Supply Chain
Policy is intended to work with various other policies in the
organization and follows our philosophy of sustainability. This year,
a supplier code of conduct was administered to all our key suppliers.
We also revised our empanelment guidelines to screen our suppliers
on social and environmental parameters, in addition to the existing
economic criteria.
A well-defined advocacy statement guides our actions across the
globe. We engage with various national and international bodies and
organizations to influence and lead transformation on a much larger
scale across the world. Some of these include the Global Reporting
Initiative (GRI), CDP, the National Association of Software and
Services Companies (NASSCOM), the World Economic Forum (WEF),
World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD), the
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) and the United Nations Global
Compact (UNGC).
We review the progress on material aspects concerning our
stakeholders on a regular basis and communicate the progress through
appropriate channels. Periodic discussions and reviews with the Board
and its committees, the senior management and other stakeholders
across the organization help us work consistently towards fulfilling
the expectations of our direct and indirect stakeholders. This apart,
our enterprise-wide risk management framework monitors social and
environmental risks as part of the societal risks on a quarterly basis.
Through our actions over the years, we have demonstrated that
sustainability makes good business sense. I am confident that our
efforts will continue to fuel a sustainable business for a better tomorrow.

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Sustainability at Infosys
As a global leader in consulting, technology, and outsourcing solutions,
Infosys (‘the Company’) works with clients in over 30 countries.
Our experience gives our clients a distinct advantage, helping them
manage their business and power their transformation into a smarter
organization. Our sustainability strategy forms the basis of running
our business responsibly and successfully. We work with our internal
and external stakeholders to define our sustainability strategy and
goals. Our sustainability agenda focuses on three themes — social
contract, resource intensity and green innovation, which are based
on the foundation of our values, known in short as C-LIFE : Client
value, Leadership by example, Integrity and transparency, Fairness,
and Excellence.

Social contract
Enterprises have an extended set of stakeholders. These stakeholders
have the potential to influence the future of business. These
stakeholders also have ethical, social and environmental expectations
that extend beyond financial goals and legal requirements. We believe
that these social covenants are fundamental to nurturing stakeholder
trust and ensuring business continuity.

Resource intensity
In the face of accelerated depletion of natural resources, incremental
increase in resource efficiencies are not sufficient, and beyond a point,
optimization gets prohibitively expensive. Resource intensity is about
doing far more with far less. We constantly look at transformational
ways to de-intensify and achieve the same or better outcomes, using
fewer resources.

Green innovation
Business imperatives such as environmental sustenance and resource
conservation are providing new opportunities for enterprises to
innovate and spur business growth. Green innovation for us is
about addressing sustainability challenges through innovation,
differentiation, driving efficiencies and creating new avenues for a
better and sustainable world around us.

Social
contract

Community empathy

c

Industry-academia partnerships
Employee engagement

Green
innovation

Sustainability
at Infosys

Resource
intensity

CO2

Responsible consumption
Cost savings
Conservation and replenishment
Client-centric green solutions
Infosys Labs R&D
Sustainable product offerings

Sustainability at Infosys | 7

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Materiality, stakeholder engagement and reporting
The materiality evaluation at Infosys is based on aspects and topics that impact us and our stakeholders on economic, environmental and social
parameters.
The process of defining the report content and aspect boundaries is as follows :
•	 Stakeholder engagement
•	 Identification of material aspects and topics
•	 Monitoring and reporting
Based on discussions and deliberations with the Management and various committees, we have arrived at the following stakeholders who are
important to us : clients, employees, investors, vendors / partners, governments, regulatory bodies, academia and local communities. Details of
the process of stakeholder engagement and materiality evaluation are provided in the Materiality and stakeholder engagement section in the Annual
Report 2013-14 available on www.infosys.com. The stakeholder consultation process is used to support the highest governance body's identification
and management of economic, environmental and social impacts, risks and opportunities.

Material

Materiality matrix

Information security
and data privacy

Water

Client value

Relevant but not significant

Importance to stakeholders

Energy

Community impact

Talent management
Equal opportunity

Waste

Occupational health and safety

Advocacy / Public policy

Intellectual property

Environmental innovation : Products / Services

Child labor

Human rights

Responsible supply chain

Social innovation : Products / Services

Not material

Compliance and
anti-corruption

Marketing communications

Emissions

Products / Services
(health and safety impact)

Economic performance

Biodiversity
Forced labor

Raw materials used
Not material

Relevant but not significant

Material

Impact on Infosys
Managed, not reported

Optional reporting

Monitored and reported

The following diagram represents the materiality matrix of the aspects that relate to our business :
The aspects organized in the materiality matrix are managed through relevant channels and initiatives. However, only those aspects that are
material to us are monitored and reported on a regular basis.

Determination of aspect boundary
The boundary of reporting for all material aspects covers our global locations spread across the following regions :
•	 India
•	 Asia Pacific (APAC)
•	 Europe, Middle East and Africa (EMEA)
•	 The Americas
Some aspects may not be material in certain regions of our operation while others may have impacts in regions that go beyond our operating
boundaries.

8 | Materiality, stakeholder engagement and reporting

This page covers GRI G4 General Standard Disclosures
G4-18, G4-19, G4-20, G4-24, G4-25, G4-26, G4-27

2015

2015

APAC

2016

Internal boundary (1)

Ame
ricas

20

EM
EA

2016
2016

2016

Not significant

2016
2016

Only significant data reported (3)

2016
2016

Target year for baselining

)

Material and fully reported

(2
ndary
u
o
b
l
rna
Exte

Emission
s

Water

Energy

(3)

(2)

	 Internal boundary – includes Infosys campuses and offices that are owned and leased.
	 External boundary – includes client sites, supplier locations or other impacted areas.
	 The boundary criteria for material aspects that are grouped under this category are as follows :
(a) Energy : Includes data centers in EMEA and Americas.
(b) Emissions : Includes GHG emissions from our operations in APAC and data centers in EMEA and Americas.
(c) Waste : Includes food, paper, metal, wood, plastic and hazardous wastes for India locations. Since most of the operations outside India are based out of leased facilities, the management of power, water and waste is handled by the lessors in accordance with local laws.
(4)
	 We are currently developing a model to estimate the financial implications of climate change risks across all regions. This will be reported in our disclosures for fiscal year 2016.

(1)

Materi
al
a
s
p
ects
an
d
top
ics

Economic per
forman
ce (4)
Client value

This page covers GRI G4 General Standard Disclosures
G4-17, G4-18, G4-20, G4-21, G4-23, G4-27

17

Information s
ecurity
an
d
d
Intellectual p
ata p
ropert
riva
y
cy
Mar
k
e
t
i
n
g
c
o
mmun
icatio
Compliance
n
a
n
d
a
n
ti-co
rrup
Equal oppor
tunity
tion
Occupation
al hea
l
t
h
and
Talent man
safe
agem
ty
ent
Human rig
hts
Respons
i
b
l
e
s
upp
ly ch
ain

dia
In

Waste

The aspect boundary for all material aspects / topics is as follows :

Aspect boundary

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Materiality, stakeholder engagement and reporting | 9

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Materiality aspects and scope
The following are the material aspects that are monitored and reported periodically :
Material aspects /
topics

What is the scope?

Why is it material for us?

Economic
performance

•	 Economic value generated and
distributed
•	 Risks and opportunities related to
climate change

Economic performance is key to building a sustainable organization and
carrying the benefits to associated stakeholders.

Client value

•	 Client satisfaction
•	 Client solutions

Staying relevant to changing business and client expectations is critical to
our growth. Thus, focusing on co-creation of solutions, integrated service
offerings and embracing new technology is important to position ourselves as
strategic partners.

Information security
and data privacy

•	 Data privacy incidents

Inadequate protection of information and information assets can severely
impact our capability to achieve and sustain our business performance.
Information security includes confidentiality, integrity and availability of
information. The data privacy office ensures that necessary processes and
controls are in place to safeguard information of all categories that are
relevant to the Company.

Marketing
communication

•	 Compliance with regulations and
voluntary codes for marketing
communication

Marketing communication and brand management have a direct impact on
our business. We ensure compliance to regulations and voluntary codes to
avoid anti-competitive behavior, anti-trust, and monopoly practices, which
may affect consumer choice and pricing.

Compliance and
anti‑corruption

•	 Compliance with all applicable
regulations
•	 Code of conduct and ethics

Stakeholder (internal and external) expectation on the organization's
adherence to integrity, governance and good business practices is extremely
high. Corruption in any form can be a significant deterrent to the above.
At Infosys, it is imperative that our company affairs are managed in a fair
and transparent manner. This is vital to gain and retain the trust of our
stakeholders.

Intellectual property

•	 Tacit and explicit knowledge of
human capital

We recognize the growing importance of Intellectual Property (IP) in our
day‑to‑day business. We have well-defined policies and practices to minimize
exposure to IP risks and maximize business benefits.

Talent management

•	 Employee demographics
•	 Employee benefits
•	 Collective bargaining agreements
•	 Training and education
•	 Human rights screening

Employees enable a company to innovate, differentiate and succeed.
Our workforce comprises highly talented individuals from across the globe.
In our continuous endeavor to attract and retain top talent, we need to focus
on talent management programs for recruitment, development and retention.

Equal opportunity

•	 Diversity and inclusivity
•	 Non-discrimination
•	 Grievance mechanisms
•	 Work-life balance

The Company is an equal opportunity employer and fair treatment is part of
the Infosys Code of Conduct and Ethics. We are committed to providing a
work environment free of discrimination and harassment.

Occupational health
and safety

•	 Health and safety committee
•	 Incident management
•	 Occupational health

We are committed to high standards of occupational health and safety
management and providing a safe and healthy work place for our employees,
consultants and contractors.

Human rights

•	 Human rights training
•	 Incidents and redressal
mechanisms

Being in a knowledge industry that is highly dependent on people's
intellectual abilities, providing an environment where human rights are
respected is critical to our operations. Ensuring human rights screening for
our stakeholders such as our suppliers, vendors and partners is essential for
running our business responsibly.

Responsible supply
chain

•	 Supplier code of conduct
•	 Supplier assessment for labor and
environmental practices
•	 Supplier human rights assessment

We have a large supplier base for the procurement of goods and services
to support our operations. We also work with strategic alliance partners to
deliver client solutions. Thus, managing the supply chain is critical to our
business.

Water

•	 Water management

India and the APAC are water-stressed zones of the world. Since most of
our operations are based in these regions, it is critical for us to manage this
resource efficiently. Hence this aspect is material to our operations. We aim to
make our campuses water-sustainable.

10 | Materiality, stakeholder engagement and reporting

This page covers GRI G4 General Standard Disclosures
G4-18, G4-19

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Material aspects /
topics

What is the scope?

Why is it material for us?

Energy

•	 Energy management

The environmental footprint of our organization is proportional to its energy
consumption, which also has a direct bearing on our operational costs, and
overall exposure to fluctuations in energy supply and prices.
We have made a voluntary commitment to become carbon neutral by fiscal
year 2018.

Emissions

•	 Management of GHG emissions

As a responsible organization, we aim to manage our footprint on emissions
including greenhouse gas emissions. We have also made a voluntary
commitment to become carbon neutral by fiscal year 2018.

Waste

•	 Management of waste
•	 Management of effluents
•	 Spills

We have been persistent in our efforts to ensure reuse, recycling and
responsible disposal of waste. We also have a focused approach towards
waste management. We play a vital role in influencing our supply chain for
efficient management of waste, and insist on the reuse of packaging material
used in the supply of goods to us.

Notes :	 The following are the limitations relating to certain environmental, social and governance parameters in the current reporting cycle :
Environment  : We are in the process of ascertaining the impact of our suppliers on the environment. We propose to baseline data related to supplier impact on environment by
fiscal 2016.
Governance : Details of individual compensation are subject to confidentiality constraints. However, the board compensation and the compensation of senior executives across
the globe are reported in our Annual Report 2013-14.
Social

: The composition of the board of directors is provided in our Annual Report 2013-14. We are strengthening our systems and processes to capture diversity indicators
at the management level across the organization by fiscal 2016.

Monitoring and reporting
The Infosys quality management system is developed in an integrated manner and adheres to various global compliance and management systems.
We are certified by the following standards :
•	 ISO 9001 – Quality management system
•	 ISO 27001 – Information security management system
•	 ISO 22301 – Societal security, business continuity management system
•	 AS9100 – Aerospace management system
•	 TL9000 – Telecom leadership
•	 ISO 20000 – IT service management system
•	 ISO 13485 – Medical devices management system
•	 ISO 14001 – Environmental management system
•	 OHSAS 18001 – Occupational health and safety
•	 CMMi Level 5
The Infosys quality management system is reviewed and audited periodically by external certification bodies. The certifications, accreditations, and
assessments that we undergo help us constantly benchmark our services and processes against globally recognized quality standards. We report
the goals, progress and management of these material aspects / topics in our corporate reports and on our website www.infosys.com.

This page covers GRI G4 General Standard Disclosures
G4-18, G4-19

Materiality, stakeholder engagement and reporting | 11

This page is left blank intentionally

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Social contract

Piloted Individual Productivity Framework,
a novel initiative to drive performance
Launched First Take, a communication campaign
to sustain direct connect with employees
Partnered with TV18 to present ‘Innovating for a
Better Tomorrow’ series on CNN-IBN and CNBC
Filed 79 patents during fiscal year 2014
Received silver recognition at the Express IT Awards
for Health Assessment and Lifestyle Enrichment (HALE)
Covered 372 colleges under Campus Connect,
our industry-academia partnership program
Launched Responsible Supply Chain Policy,
and brought key suppliers under the Infosys Supplier
Code of Conduct

Social contract | 13

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Srikantan Moorthy
Group Head, Human Resources Development

Srikantan Moorthy

Group Head, Human Resources Development

Our commitment to social contract
At Infosys, sustainability is an integral part of our business philosophy
— profitability, sustainability, predictability and de-risking (PSPD).
We fundamentally believe that economic development is critical to
human progress.
Being an organization that is dependent on the competency of people
to deliver value to clients, our employees are our most valued assets.
We aim to attract and retain the best talent in the market. We hire from
the best campuses in large numbers. Our senior leaders participate in
recruitment drives to position our company and attract the best talent.
We strive to create an environment of meritocracy that provides all our
employees with opportunities to excel, learn and progress.
Over the last three years, we have seen a rise in our attrition levels.
We have identified broad action areas to strengthen our engagement
with our employees. These include, but are not limited to, bringing
better predictability to various HR programs, creating more career
development opportunities, investing in training and competency
development to enable employees in their roles as people and business
managers and greater objectivity in the performance management
process. We have created a Talent Acquisition and Fulfillment
Function (TAFF) to strengthen the efficiency of our talent management
process. We have launched a Fast Track Promotion program to identify,
recognize and nurture high-performing and technically proficient
employees. We are currently working on tools and technologies to
enhance individual productivity. We believe that these measures will
help us curb attrition and foster a high-performance work culture.
We believe in an open-door culture. We have several forums where
employees engage with senior leaders including the CEO to share their
thoughts and concerns. We have introduced ‘Just A Minute (JAM)’
sessions with the management, where employees can interact with
senior leaders over lunch in the informal environment of food courts.
We have also launched First Take, an ‘employee first’ communication
campaign that provides a brief of all major happenings within the
organization to our employees. Along with these open employee
engagement forums, we also have well-defined channels to address
employee grievances relating to work, discrimination and harassment.

14 | Social contract

The global nature of our business necessitates a focus on diversity and
inclusion. Our diversity and inclusion programs embrace employees
of different gender, age, nationality and physical ability. We follow
a multi-pronged approach to promote diversity and inclusivity
within the organization and review our efforts periodically. As an
equal opportunity employer, we promote a culture of meritocracy.
The principles and goals of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
are at the center of our diversity and inclusion strategy.
To ensure a safe workplace for our employees, we have established an
Occupational Health and Safety Management System (HSEMS) across
our campuses. As a signatory to the United Nations Global Compact
(UNGC), we created a Human Rights Statement, which explains our
policies and practices predominantly covering the Company's stand
on compliance with global norms on providing a harassment-free
workplace, freedom of association, workplace health and safety and
anti-corruption safeguards. A stringent internal and independent
review framework and governance ensures that we are compliant with
current and ongoing best practices related to human capital. We have
work councils in every region of our operations to ensure compliance.
While we hire the best talent, we believe that it is our responsibility to
also build future talent and provide the required support for academic
institutions to align with the needs of the industry. Campus Connect,
our industry-academia flagship program, partners with engineering
colleges to prepare their talent pool for the requirements in the
IT space.
We support the volunteering efforts of our employees. Besides
supporting employee-led CSR and eco groups at our campuses,
we also have the ‘I, Citizen of the Earth’ (iCoE) program to support
the development of social leadership competencies and to promote
responsible citizenship among our employees.
As a corporation, we are committed to supporting and nurturing our
employees and the community around us. This is the only way we can
create wealth and grow together.

This page covers GRI G4 General Standard Disclosure G4-27

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Economic performance
Economic performance is key to building a sustainable organization.
Enterprises the world over are transforming their businesses to be
resilient to short‑term knockbacks, but reshaped for long‑term
growth, aiming at radical innovation with methodical execution.
While economic recovery continues to be fragile, businesses are
beginning to feel optimistic.
Our annual revenue growth of 11.5% (in US dollar terms) in fiscal
year ending March 31, 2014, is a significant step‑up from the 5.8%
growth rate of the previous fiscal. While we celebrate our performance,
we continue to seek opportunities to propel growth and sustain our
performance. Our cash generation from operations remains healthy
at 114% of our net profit (as per IFRS in US dollar terms), and this
has resulted in a highly liquid balance sheet. We have honored all our
employee commitments and given two cycles of promotions and a
salary hike during the year.
For us, the task ahead is simple to state. It is to increase the
competitiveness in the market to achieve industry‑leading growth and
margins. This goal requires us to attract, enable, empower and retain
the best and the brightest talent and build a multi‑cultural workforce;
develop leadership and succession planning; improve the agility of
the company; and sharpen the accountability of our business units,
business enabler functions, projects and individuals to deliver results.
As part of these initiatives, we have been focusing on strengthening
our brand, becoming more meritocratic and multi‑cultural, expanding
our market coverage, enlarging our value proposition, quickening our
responses to our stakeholders, sharpening our focus on recruitment
and training, improving our productivity, and cutting down wasteful
expenditure. Our leadership believes that these activities are work in
progress and will take about two years to yield results.
We engage with our investors and analysts on a regular basis, and
address their queries and often solicit their feedback. This feedback
was helpful in the Board's recent decision to increase the dividend
payout ratio to up to 40% of post‑tax profits effective fiscal year 2014
— a decision that enhances returns for our shareholders.
During uncertain times, managing liquidity and controlling costs are
crucial. Yet, the equilibrium has to be maintained with investments
that augment growth while sustaining the morale of the employees.
Over the last year, we have initiated some measures to achieve higher
cost‑optimization levels. These included streamlining business
support functions to reduce their cost of operations, improving the
utilization percentage of employees through an integrated talent
supply chain management and deployment of tools to measure and
improve individual productivity. Further, initiatives to increase the
offshore component of work have been deployed. Another focus
area has been the broad‑basing of the employee pyramid structure
by reducing overheads. We optimized sub‑contractor deployment to
suit business needs and enhanced the effectiveness of cost governance
and review mechanisms at the business unit level. While some of the
above measures are expected to yield results in the medium term, we
have begun to see some change in the cost structure during the current
year, as reflected by an improvement in the operating margin — from
23.5% (in US dollar terms) in Q1 FY 2014 to 25.5% in Q4 FY 2014.
In addition to increasing our competitive advantage in terms of pricing
power, cost optimization helps us invest more in the sales function and
make long‑term investments in building strong client relationships.
In the past year, we have embarked upon several initiatives to
accelerate growth. They are focused on restructuring the organization
for agility by creating smaller and nimbler sales regions to increase
focus on underpenetrated markets and industry segments; redesigning
our supply chain function and enhancing the speed of fulfilling
fast‑changing market needs, renewing emphasis on winning large
outsourcing deals; enabling our sales teams with a consultative
mindset and better decision‑making systems; attracting and retaining
a high‑performing and multi‑cultural sales force; and redesigning

performance management systems with greater emphasis on
meritocracy and rewarding exceptional performance.
We make sure that we do not lose focus of the need to give back
to society. Through the Infosys Foundation, we continue to expand
our reach and make a difference to society by empowering people
and communities at the bottom of the pyramid, and providing
opportunities to improve standards of living. The Foundation received
around US $1.48 million as grant from Infosys Limited in fiscal year
2014.

Financial performance
A snapshot of our financial performance in fiscal year 2014 is as follows :
Particular

2013-14
(Approximation in US$
million)

Direct economic value generated
Revenues
Other income
Economic value distributed
Operating costs
Employee wages and benefits
Payments to providers of capital
Payments to governments
(total taxes paid)
Community investments
(contribution to Infosys Foundation)
Economic value retained (calculated
as ‘Economic value generated less
Economic value distributed’)

8,249
440
1,524
4,746
443
1,046
1

(1)

929

	 The actual amount donated is US $1.48 million.

(1)

For more details, refer to our Annual Report and Form-20F, available on
www.infosys.com.

Client value
As a global leader in consulting, technology, and outsourcing solutions,
we enable clients in over 30 countries to outperform the competition
and stay ahead of the innovation curve. We help enterprises transform
and thrive in a changing world through strategic consulting, operational
leadership, and the co-creation of breakthrough solutions, including
those in mobility, sustainability, big data, and cloud computing.
In a fast changing world, new challenges and rising client expectations
have become the norm. Staying relevant to these changes and focusing
on co-creation of solutions, integrated service offerings and embracing
new technologies will help us position ourselves as strategic partners
for our clients. Refer to the ‘Green innovation’ section of this report for more
details on the impact of our client solutions and offerings
We ensure that we deliver measurable value in every stage of our
service offerings to clients. A strong focus on quality, usage of tools
and technology and lean processes ensure greater efficiency and speed
of execution for our clients. Some of the processes, frameworks and
tool innovations developed during fiscal year 2014 are as follows :
Individual Productivity (IPr) framework : As we continue to focus on
frameworks to drive process efficiencies, we piloted a first‑of-its kind
framework to gauge efficiencies and effectiveness. The IPr framework
measures individual productivity in an objective manner. It provides
data to individuals in a transparent manner so that they can plan for
self-improvement, help ascertain training and developmental needs
and drive team excellence.
Infosys Continuous Integration Platform (ICIP) : This platform helps
project teams embrace agility, enhance overall application quality
and improve cycle time by enabling shorter feedback cycles in an
automated manner. It is a centralized web-based platform that offers
a simple-to-use interface to configure the Java / J2EE and .NET
applications for continuous integration. The platform provides
Social contract | 15

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

automation across several lifecycle tasks, generates build‑scripts and
triggers relevant validations, thus helping projects achieve and realize
continuous delivery capabilities and associated benefits.
Infosys Transition Advantage (ITA) : ITA is a differentiating transition
management platform for outsourcing programs. The  Infosys
Transition Management approach brings transparency by allowing all
program stakeholders including clients to monitor progress on the
program by providing a consolidated view of the transition in a timely,
efficient, and cost-effective manner.
Project Management Center of Excellence (PMCoE) : PMCoE offers
value-added consulting services to large and complex projects
and business transformation programs to help them achieve
industry‑leading delivery performance. PMCOE deploys prediction
tools based on Monte Carlo simulation to predict and mitigate program
risks and improve delivery efficiency, leading to better margins.
Requirement Elicitation and Analysis Framework (REAP) : This
framework is being deployed to help establish accurate, complete and
unambiguous requirements in projects where clients are not clear on
the complete scope and require faster delivery. The key features of
REAP are Requirement Ambiguity Checker, Testability Assessment
Tool, Requirement Risk Assessment Tool, Requirement Quality
Analyzer and Quick Reference Cards.

Engaging with clients
We maintain a continuous dialog with our clients on issues that
concern their areas of business. We host conferences periodically to
forge closer ties with our clients, share thought leadership on emerging
business and technology topics, and offer insights from some of the
brightest practitioners of business, technology and leadership in the
world today. We host premier CXO-level events annually in Europe
and the Americas which are specifically designed for our BPO clients
and for the banking clients of Finacle.
The forums that we use for engaging and building relationships with
our clients are :
•	 Client satisfaction surveys
•	 Engagement-level feedback
•	 Requests for proposals
•	 Client visits and meetings
•	 Quarterly business reviews
•	 Sustainability portal on our website, www.infosys.com
•	 Conclaves and workshops
•	 Mailers, newsletters, and brochures
•	 Social media
•	 Analysts meetings
One of the highlights of fiscal year 2014 was the National Outsourcing
Association's (NOA) award for excellence in telecommunication,
utilities and hi-tech outsourcing for 2013 that we won along with
our client, British Telecom. We won the award for bringing about
significant productivity gains for our client and making it easy for their
engineers to work on the move.

Client satisfaction survey
Receiving regular feedback from our clients during and after the
completion of a project is a key objective of our client engagement
strategy. We also gather ‘feedforward’ as this allows us to understand
the client's expectations and needs and helps us make the right
investment decisions.
We believe in taking corrective actions and acting responsibly in all
our interactions with our clients. We gain insights and understand
our clients better through our annual Client Value Survey (CVS)
and engagement level feedbacks. The survey framework includes a
structured questionnaire with a satisfaction rating on a seven-point
scale, encompassing close to 30 parameters, with language versions
in English, French, German, Japanese and Spanish.
The feedback collection is done through a web survey hosted by an
independent organization, which ensures confidentiality.
The survey model focuses on :
•	 Expectation and fulfilment : Top three expectations of CXOs
and senior-level respondents from Infosys and their perception
on fulfilment
•	 Client disposition : Gauging overall experience of working with us
•	 Business and technology priorities and expectations
•	 Service line feedback
•	 Comparison against ‘best-of-breed’ firms 
: Client-selected
benchmarks preferred over rating of a predetermined list of firms
•	 Clustering clients into homogeneous groups : Allows for differential
approaches towards clients
A statistical analysis of this data provides inputs on core, moderate and
breakaway client groups, which the account teams use to evaluate the
strength of their individual relationships and to design interventions
that create a positive and visible impact on our clients. Various members
across levels engage with clients to seek their feedback and inputs on
service delivery, product expectations and technology requirements.

Client feedback score
Our client feedback score over the last three years on different
parameters are as follows :
Particulars
Satisfaction
Loyalty
Advocacy
Business value for spend

2013
5.49
5.66
5.57
4.94

2012
5.60
5.83
5.70
5.09

2011
5.58
5.81
5.68
5.04

Note :	 The feedback is sought on a seven-point scale

Engagement level feedback
Engagement level feedback (ELF) acts as a mechanism to gather
response from clients on their experience of engagements with us, be it
projects, ongoing outsourced support, or consulting-led transformation
programs. The feedback is sought multiple times during and at the end
of the engagement on 14 different parameters, covering areas such as
service delivery management, quality of products or services delivered,
and behavioral competencies involved in the engagement.
Diverse teams such as project delivery, quality and the process group
study and evaluate set parameters during an engagement to improve
deliverables and to attain client satisfaction and delight. ELF is also
treated as the lead indicator in our annual client-value survey. Based
on the account-level ELF, the client partner and the delivery anchor
drive improvement programs for the account.

Client complaints
Grievance handling is built into our client engagement process with
defined escalation levels. Our robust client complaints mechanism
allows us to seek feedback from our clients on an ongoing basis and
communicate the resolution of issues / complaints.
Infosys and British Telecom teams receiving the NOA award

16 | Social contract

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

In fiscal year 2014, and during the last five years, there were no cases
filed by any stakeholder against the Company regarding unfair trade
practices, irresponsible advertising and / or anti-competitive behavior.
There are no pending cases as on March 31, 2014.

Information security and data privacy
Our vision is to be a globally respected corporation. One of the
imperatives of this vision is the assurance of the security and privacy
of information assets belonging to the Company, and all information
that is entrusted to us by employees, clients, vendors, investors and
other stakeholders.
The following are our information security goals :
•	 Confidentiality : The assurance that information is accessible only
to those authorized to have access to it.
•	 Integrity : The assurance of the completeness and accuracy of the
information provided by us, and the integrity of its processing
methods.
•	 Availability : The assurance that authorized users have access to
information and associated assets whenever they require.
Information can be stored, processed or transmitted in many different
ways. We make extensive use of information and communication
technology (computers, high speed storage, communication devices
etc.) for these purposes. We also use traditional means of storing,
processing and transmitting information — for example, writing or
printing on paper, or communicating over phone, fax or in face-to-face
conversations. Information must always be appropriately protected,
regardless of the manner in which it is stored, processed or transmitted.
The following are some examples of how inadequate protection of
information and information assets can impact our capability to
achieve and sustain our vision :
•	 A virus attack on a single computer in a network could lead to the
virus spreading to all other machines in the network, resulting in
severe impact on our work.
•	 Unauthorized alteration of the contents of our home page on the
Internet can seriously affect our brand image.
•	 Inappropriate disclosure of confidential client information, whether
revealed to unauthorized users on a computer system or told to them
in a conversation, can lead to a violation of contractual agreements
with the client, resulting in financial loss and loss of trust.
Data privacy and security are therefore key aspects of our sustainable
value chain. We are certified on ISO27001 and have stringent processes
and practices to ensure compliance to the global data privacy and
security requirements. We also follow the guidelines as prescribed in
ISO29100 to have necessary systems in place to safeguard information
of any category relevant to any entity in relation to the Company.
We leverage technology to protect, store, process or transmit
information in different ways using innovative and state-of-the-art
tools and techniques. We have an information security policy, and
our security objective is to create an environment in which our
employees and third parties (vendors, contractors, consultants, and
other non‑employees who are allowed access to Infosys facilities)
comply with the policy in their everyday practices and processes.
As we cater to clients from diverse sectors such as banking, retail
and telecommunications, with most such engagements being
regulated by data protection acts and involving the processing of

personal data, compliance to data privacy during project execution
is of utmost importance. However, the scope of data privacy in such
client engagements is often limited to contractual requirements —
rather than regulatory requirements — applicable to a data processor
and agreed upon with our clients. Appropriate data privacy policies,
processes and review mechanisms have been deployed to ensure
compliance.
Along with unprecedented development in digital technologies
that allows personal data processing with greater ease, we are also
witnessing stricter data privacy legislations around the world.
At Infosys, the focus is on continuously improving our measures and
preparing ourselves for the new risks and opportunities arising out of
the changing business environment.
The corporate data privacy office is assisted by a privacy sub-council
consisting of senior representatives from various business process
functions in managing the risks proactively. The cross-functional
Information Security Council headed by a Board member ensures
governance and senior management sponsorship for data privacy
compliance activities.
Our employees are trained on every aspect of information security and
data privacy and have to take mandatory quizzes at regular intervals
to keep themselves updated about policies and practices. As part
of continuous education and engagement, the policy and relevant
updates are communicated to our employees and vendor partners at
regular intervals through various forums and engagement models such
as workshops, mailer campaigns and videos.
Any incidents pertaining to data privacy, when reported, are promptly
acted upon and appropriate actions are taken to prevent recurrence.
In fiscal year 2014, two incidents related to breach of customer
data privacy were reported. Both the incidents have been addressed
and closed.

Information risk management
We believe in going beyond compliance and implementing processes
and systems to ensure information security and data privacy along our
value chain. We have introduced necessary controls to reduce risks
to an acceptable level and we operate based on the confidentiality,
integrity and availability requirements of the information shared by
our clients. All information transactions comply with international and
national laws. Client / employee information is treated as confidential
and processed on a need-to-know basis. Any other controls agreed
upon with the client is applied in processing the information.
Only company-authorized devices and networks with proper data
encryption mechanisms to protect information assets are made available
to employees and third parties after a series of approvals, checks and
balances. Any violations are treated on high priority and with zero
tolerance. We also have exceptions for any deviation from the policy
that is reviewed and authorized by the head of the Information Security
Group or the chairman of the Information Security Council or by
individuals nominated by them. We encourage our employees to clear
their desks and screens, whenever they leave their workstation to ensure
zero risk of data / information misuse. We have effective systems and
checks for media disposal after the expiry of their usage life to protect
data from falling into the hands of unauthorized parties. With effective
data center standards and systems, we are able to monitor, govern and
develop skills and capacities that enable continuous improvement.

Social contract | 17

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Advocacy
We were one of the first Indian IT companies to set up a dedicated
function to focus on data privacy about four years ago. We actively
participate in industry initiatives on data privacy, such as the
development of Data Privacy Assessment framework led by the
Data Security Council of India (DSCI), development of international
standards on privacy and programs intended to promote awareness
on data privacy. We arranged a seminar in Bangalore this year on the
occasion of International Data Privacy Day (January 28). The event
featured a panel discussion by senior leaders from various streams
and industries on the topic, ‘Privacy today and tomorrow – the Indian
and the global context’.

Marketing communication and brand
management
We achieve the objectives of our marketing efforts through the
well‑coordinated use of various promotional methods that reinforce
each other in a cohesive marketing communication and brand
management strategy. These channels include :
•	 Media / public relations
•	 Influencer connect
•	 Advertising
•	 Digital marketing
•	 Events
The marketing function at Infosys has a clear mandate to focus on two
main themes that directly impact our business :
Brand impact : We periodically take stock of our brand presence in our
current and new markets through focused surveys consisting of key
parameters with both business and technology dimensions. Based on
an analysis of the survey results, we customize our events to meet
specific goals to position our brand.
Pipeline impact : We work closely with our business verticals to identify
new opportunities, position our offerings and work in a manner that
has a positive impact on our client's businesses.

Panel discussion on the occasion of International Data Privacy Day

Intellectual property
We recognize the growing importance of Intellectual Property (IP) in
our day-to-day business and we have policies and practices in place
to minimize exposure to IP risks and maximize business benefits.
With an innovation-centric approach towards enhancing the services
efficiency and value-addition in our offerings, intellectual property links
innovation and commercialization. It is with this view that the IP Cell at
Infosys formulates strategies and has adopted a two‑pronged  approach :
•	 Value enhancement
•	 Risk mitigation
While value enhancement focuses on generating proprietary
intellectual property, risk mitigation processes entail implementing
initiatives or programs to ensure compliance to licenses / agreements
and respecting third-party intellectual property. Many of our
intellectual property assets have been translated into offerings for our
clients. To enrich and strengthen our research efforts, we have drafted
a policy that incentivizes and recognizes inventors through rewards
at various levels. We believe this two-pronged approach will, in the
long term, enable us to be leaders in the industry for value addition
to our services and offerings and also for contribution to scientific
progress. The number of patents filed and granted in fiscal year 2014
is as follows :
Fiscal
year
2014

No. of patents filed (first
filings / unique inventions)
79

All our marketing communications, promotions and sponsorships
comply with the relevant laws of the countries we operate in, and
several of our campaigns have been recognized internationally. A good
example is our integrated thought leadership campaign, ‘Connect with
the CMO’. The multi-dimensional campaign, targeted at Consumer
Packaged Goods companies, in Europe, consisted of a coordinated
series of targeted activities with robust content and was measured
through the Awareness-Interest-Desire-Action model. The campaign
has opened doors in prospect companies, converted sales leads to
revenues, built new traction with existing clients, and earned extensive
media coverage. It won us the ITSMA Gold Award for Marketing
Excellence in 2013.
Another marketing initiative, widely covered by media, was executed
closer home, in India. In partnership with TV18, Infosys presented
the series, ‘Innovating for a Better Tomorrow’, on the CNN-IBN and
CNBC news channels. This television series showcased 14 exemplary
innovations that have not only transformed the lives of millions of
Indians but have made indelible impressions globally. Some notable
examples were Amul, the world's largest milk producer, GE Healthcare's
low-cost ECG machine – MAC 400, and Dr. Devi Shetty's Narayana
Hrudalaya. The series began with a discussion between CNN-IBN
Deputy Editor, Sagarika Ghose, and our Co‑Founder and Executive
Chairman, Narayana Murthy, outlining the dynamics of innovation,
its challenges, opportunities and the role of corporate houses in
supporting it. It culminated in an awards ceremony where the
innovators behind these 14 transformational ideas were felicitated
with innovation awards.

No. of patents granted
70

Business continuity management
Phoenix, our business continuity management program, is headed by
S. D. Shibulal, our Chief Executive Officer and Managing Director.
The Phoenix framework enables us to identify business impacts
of any disruption in our services and allows us to frame plans to
manage related risks. Business continuity plans are regularly tested at
the corporate, development center and account levels. Regular drills
ensure the collaboration of various internal departments and active
participation of employees.
18 | Social contract

Narayana Murthy on ‘Innovating for a Better Tomorrow’

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

All our marketing activities are guided, in spirit, by the Infosys brand
guidelines. It gives everyone who represents us the tools and the
discipline needed to strengthen and reinforce who we are, wherever
we represent ourselves in the world. It unites all of our far-reaching
brand entities with a common way of communicating. The guidelines
are documented in the brand book available for ready reference on
the Company's intranet. We also have a well-defined governance
structure within the marketing department, with a clear escalation
mechanism, to ensure adherence to these guidelines. We work closely
with our data privacy team to understand the privacy regulations in the
regions where we operate. Whenever any incident of non-compliance
is either spotted or reported, the core branding team gets involved to
investigate, analyze and resolve the issue. Other teams, such as the
legal team, may be consulted depending on the nature of the incident.
No instance of regulatory non‑compliance was reported regarding our
marketing communication during fiscal year 2014.
On the operations front, we have chosen to deploy a leading tool for
our marketing automation needs. It helps increase the efficiency and
effectiveness of the marketing team.
As is the norm every year, we invested in a brand survey to help
us benchmark our brand performance against that of global
competitors across key dimensions such as awareness, familiarity and
differentiation. We also track our performance, on an ongoing basis,
using lead indicators such as awards, analyst rankings, volume of press
coverage across markets and qualitative customer feedback. With
these initiatives, the marketing function at Infosys exercises positive
influence on two strategic themes — the impact of brand Infosys on
our stakeholders and the impact of marketing on the sales pipeline.

Compliance and anti-corruption policies
The key dimensions of our corporate governance framework are
as follows :
Transparency, fairness and accountability : We have consistently
followed the highest levels of disclosure with our stakeholders. Besides
ensuring compliance with the laws of the land wherever we operate,
we have specific policies to ensure transparency and accountability,
such as the Code of Conduct and Ethics and the Whistleblower
Policy. For several years now, CRISIL has consistently assigned us the
‘CRISIL Governance and Value Creation (GVC) Level 1’ rating. ICRA
has assigned the ‘Corporate Governance Rating (CGR) 1’ rating to
our practices. We disclose financial statements in accordance with the
Indian GAAP and International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS).
We are committed to encouraging and protecting a free and fair
market competition by complying with anti-competitive regulations
across jurisdictions. Our code of conduct establishes the standards for
behavior for free and fair competition for all our employees.
Board governance : We believe that an active, diverse, well-informed
and independent board ensures the highest standards of corporate
governance. At Infosys, the Board of Directors (‘the Board’) is at
the core of our corporate governance practice and oversees how
the Management serves and protects the long-term interests of our
stakeholders. We have deployed the practice of separating the roles of
the chairman of the board and the chief executive officer to ensure the
right focus to board governance. As on March 31, 2014, the majority of
our Board members — seven out of 13 — are independent members.
An independent director is nominated as the chairperson of each of
the audit, management development and compensation, stakeholders
relationship, nominations and governance, risk management, and

corporate social responsibility committees. This helps in bringing
external perspectives, objectivity and transparency in the management
and dealings of the Company.
Corporate policies : The Code of Conduct and Ethics helps us maintain
the highest standards of business conduct for our employees and
comply with the requirements of all applicable laws and regulations
including anti-bribery, ethical handling of conflicts of interests, and
fair, accurate and timely disclosure in reports and documents that
are filed with the required regulatory bodies. This is communicated
to employees worldwide through training and awareness programs,
both online and instructor-led, using multiple learning interventions.
Every employee compulsorily attends a session on values during his
or her induction, and acknowledges the Code of Conduct and Ethics
through a sign‑up process. The code of conduct is available in English,
which is our official business language. A Whistleblower Policy, a Gift
Policy, a strong grievance redressal body, an uncompromising stand on
value transgressions, and supportive ecosystems ensure the availability
of adequate mechanisms to enable a culture of disclosure.
To promote the highest ethical standards, we maintain a workplace
that facilitates the reporting of potential violations of Company
policies and applicable laws. Employees are empowered to raise
concerns regarding such potential violations easily and free of any
fear of retaliation. Suspected violations may be reported through the
immediate supervisor, to the chief compliance officer or even through
an anonymous mail to whistleblower@infosys.com. The report may also
be directly sent to the audit committee which is the highest governance
body to handle cases of violation.
A compliance and ethics team has the mandate of overseeing the
effective implementation of the Code of Conduct in the organization.
A compliance dashboard is presented to the Board every quarter for
review. Any advice on ethical and lawful behavior and matters related
to organizational integrity may be addressed to the organization using
the mail ID, askus@infosys.com.
No instances of regulatory non-compliance were reported in fiscal
year 2014.

Talent management
Technologies, products and strategies can be replicated, but it is
employees who enable a company to innovate, differentiate and
succeed. Our workforce of highly talented individuals from various
parts of the globe is vital to our success. In our continuous endeavor to
attract and retain top talent, we have built robust talent management
programs for recruitment, development and retention.

Employees
The total number of our employees globally was 160,405 as on
March 31, 2014, covering over 98 nationalities. Our employee
base comprises about 34% women. About 12,000 contract staff (1)
(including 75% men) are hired from the local community across our
India operations for non‑core activities such as housekeeping, security
and maintenance services. About 3,000 (including 65% men) work in
core activities across the globe.
(1)	

The definition of contract staff according to the Contract Labour Act is as follows :
‘Workman’ means any person employed in or in connection with the work of any
establishment to do any skilled, semi-skilled or unskilled manual, supervisory, or clerical
work for hire or reward, whether the terms of employment be express or implied.

Refer to the ‘Responsible supply chain’ section of this report for details
on processes and policies for our contractual staff.

Social contract | 19

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Our employee distribution across region, gender, role and age is as follows :
Region

As on March 31, 2014
Men
Women
Total
95,267
48,854
144,121
2,879
2,633
5,512
4,177
1,594
5,771
2,910
2,091
5,001
105,233
55,172
160,405

India
APAC
Americas
EMEA
Total

As on March 31, 2013
Men
Women
Total
92,887
47,579
140,466
3,140
2,721
5,861
4,409
1,573
5,982
2,557
1,822
4,379
102,993
53,695
156,688

As on March 31, 2012
Men
Women
Total
89,915
47,351
137,266
2,932
2,346
5,278
3,425
1,124
4,549
1,570
1,331
2,901
97,842
52,152
149,994

As on March 31, 2013
Men
Women
Total
43,124
33,248
76,372
40,746
17,251
57,997
17,765
2,916
20,681
413
34
447
945
246
1,191
102,993
53,695
156,688

As on March 31, 2012
Men
Women
Total
45,994
34,237
80,231
35,357
15,325
50,682
16,068
2,560
18,628
423
30
453
–
–
–
97,842
52,152
149,994

As on March 31, 2013
Men
Women
Total

As on March 31, 2012
Men
Women
Total

Scope :	 Permanent and fixed-term employees hired locally across Infosys group.

Role-wise distribution

As on March 31, 2014
Men
Women
Total
45,153
35,440
80,593
41,026
16,683
57,709
18,615
3,020
21,635
439
29
468
–
–
–
105,233
55,172
160,405

Associate
Middle
Senior
Top
Others (1)
Total

	 Lodestone Holding AG became a subsidiary of the Infosys group during fiscal year 2013.

(1)

Age-wise distribution

As on March 31, 2014
Men
Women
Total

Less than or equal to 30
years
31-50 years
Greater than 50 years
Others (1)
Total

67,261
37,023
949
–
105,233

44,517
10,382
273
–
55,172

111,778
47,405
1,222
–
160,405

69,415
31,825
808
945
102,993

44,578
8,639
232
246
53,695

113,993
40,464
1,040
1,191
156,688

71,508
25,681
653
–
97,842

45,460
6,537
155
–
52,152

116,968
32,218
808
–
149,994

	 Lodestone Holding AG became a subsidiary of the Infosys group during fiscal year 2013.

(1)

Most of our employees work as full-time, permanent employees. We have a de minimus number of employees working on a part-time / fixed‑term
contract. Being an IT services and consulting company, we do not have seasonal variations in employment.
We abide by the local employment / labor laws prevailing in the countries where we operate. We have had no significant operational changes
during the fiscal year 2014. All employee benefits are provided to our permanent (full-time) and part-time / fixed-term employees based on the
entitlements mandated by the law in the countries where we operate and the locations where we recruit and hire. We do not differentiate our
compensation offering to employees (basic salary and remuneration) based on gender in any of the locations where we operate. The remuneration
is based on the role an employee performs and his / her total years of work experience.

Our glocal employees
We are committed to strengthening local hiring practices and
continuously increase the proportion of senior management hires
from the local region of our operations. The proportion of senior
management staff hired locally is around 90%.
We added 24,615 new employees this year, taking our total employee
strength to 160,405. The total count and rate of new employee hires
broken down by age, gender and region in fiscal year 2014 are as
follows :
Geography
Less than 30 years
Americas
EMEA
APAC
India
30-50 years
Americas
EMEA
APAC
India
More than 50 years
Americas
EMEA
APAC
India

20 | Social contract

Men

Rate of
hiring (%)

Women

Rate of
hiring (%)

620
587
516
19,138

2.52
2.38
2.10
77.75

419
817
566
12,237

2.73
5.32
3.68
79.62

717
367
480
1,999

2.91
1.49
1.95
8.12

348
175
234
495

2.26
1.14
1.52
3.22

105
12
72
2

0.43
0.05
0.29
0.01

56
6
17
–

0.36
0.04
0.11
0.00

The total count and rate of employee turnover broken down by age,
gender and region in fiscal year 2014 are as follows :
Geography
Less than 30 years
Americas
EMEA
APAC
India
30-50 years
Americas
EMEA
APAC
India
More than 50 years
Americas
EMEA
APAC
India

Men

Turnover
rate (%)

Women

Turnover
rate (%)

437
721
298
15,148

1.96
3.23
1.34
67.91

326
826
376
10,212

2.34
5.92
2.69
73.15

893
443
441
3,599

4.00
1.99
1.98
16.13

392
241
176
1,309

2.81
1.73
1.26
9.38

226
27
52
22

1.01
0.12
0.23
0.10

82
8
11
2

0.59
0.06
0.08
0.01

Freedom of association
We recognize the right to freedom of association through Collective
Bargaining Agreements (CBA) as per the laws of the land. We provide
policies, forums and support groups for hearing and addressing the
concerns of our employees, and resolving their issues or conflicts in a
fair and transparent manner. A de minimus percentage of our employees

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

are covered by collective bargaining agreements. We are in the process
of strengthening our internal systems to capture information on the
percentage coverage of various health and safety topics included in
collective bargaining agreements. This information will be available
from fiscal year 2015 onwards.
The details of the number of employees covered under such agreements
worldwide are as follows :
Operating location

Total number of
employees

Brazil
Spain
France
Finland
The Netherlands (1)
Japan
Sweden (1)

768
17
210
33
352
179
151

Number of employees
covered under collective
bargaining agreements
768
17
210
33
62
179
61

	 Only base employees are covered by CBA in these countries. Base employees are all
employees whose base location is the country as on March 31, 2014.

(1)

Employee communication
First Take is an employee-first communication channel that reaches
out to all Infoscions on priority, giving them details on matters related
to policy, leadership transitions, client wins, media coverage, awards
and accolades, and any other topic that may impact their work-life
at Infosys. The goal of this initiative is to convey a single authentic
version of Infosys to employees, and establish and sustain a direct
connect with them. Started in January 2014, First Take has published
nine editions so far. All the editions are available on our intranet
through an easy-to-access widget. It is also available on our extranet.
What's New is a fortnightly communication focused on content that is
useful for our Client Facing Group (CFG). Designed as a sales enabler,
What's New incorporates social share buttons with all contents so
that members of our CFG can share them with clients, prospects, and
industry influencers in just two clicks. What's New includes thought
leadership assets, important media coverage and the best analyst
citations, client testimonials and similar success stories which are not
older than 15 days. This communication seeks to highlight the success
stories of Infosys through ambassadors who have direct access to our

clients and prospects. Started in December 2014, What's New has
published six editions so far. All the editions are available on our
intranet through an easy-to-access widget.
We have established multiple channels to reach out to our employees
at all levels. We have introduced Just-a-Minute (JAM) sessions with the
Management. The JAM sessions involve a casual gathering of Infoscions
and senior leaders at the food courts over lunch, and is conducted
every quarter across our campuses. In addition, we have employee
communication channels such as organization-wide mailers, our
corporate intranet (Sparsh), corporate TV channel (InfyTV), corporate
radio channel (InfyRadio), our social networking hub, InfyBubble,
the annual employee satisfaction survey – LITMUS (Let's Interact on
Themes that Matter to Us), CEO Forum (Ask Shibu), blogs and our
internal branding and marketing portal, MPlus.

Celebrating success and excellence
The pursuit of excellence is an integral part of our core values.
The Awards for Excellence (AFE) were initiated in 1995 to recognize
the performance and contribution of our employees. This year, the
awards were given at the global and regional levels. With more than 16
categories — Account Management, Business Transformation Program
Management, Development Center (DC) Management, Excellence in
Projects, Infosys Champions, Innovation, Internal Customer Delight,
People Development, Sales and Marketing, Systems and Process,
Value Champions, Client Value, Unit / Department Management,
Sustainability / Social Consciousness, Best manager, Most Valuable
Contributor and Code Champion — the Awards for Excellence are an
inspiration for our employees to challenge all boundaries and produce
outstanding results. For more details, refer to the Awards for Excellence
section in our Annual Report available on www.infosys.com.

Employee resource groups
Our global employees represent diverse backgrounds and skills. We
have created a number of employee resource groups that address the
need of our diverse workforce, including community participation,
networking, cultural enrichment and support based on affinity, ability
and gender. These resource groups conduct programs and initiatives
such as peer-to-peer forums, leader speak series, conferences, special
events and celebrations to ensure continuous engagement with our
diverse workforce.

Some of our flagship programs and initiatives pursued during fiscal year 2014 are as follows :
Resource group

Area of influence

Highlights

Creating Common
Ground

A cultural assimilation
program

This program highlights and educates employees about the values and cultural
ethos practiced at specific locations. The program employs innovative approaches
and communication campaigns channeled through live events, mailers, posters, our
intranet and our corporate TV channel. The most recent assimilation programs were
done for employees from Switzerland and Germany.

Family Matters

Employee resource group
for parents

This group promotes work-life balance among young parents in the organization.
Apart from family enrichment programs and workshops, Family Matters offers
networking opportunities for employees through support and information sharing.
Referrals are also provided on day care services and schools.

Infosys Gay, Lesbian
employees and You
(IGLU)

Employee resource group
for employees from the
LGBT community

IGLU is an affinity group set up in fiscal year 2012 with the objective of creating
a safe and respectful work environment for employees from the Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual, and Transgender (LGBT) community. Awareness programs and exclusive
events are held to foster inclusion.

Infyability

Employee resource group
for differently‑abled
employees

This is a forum that works towards creating a sensitive and inclusive workplace for
differently-abled employees. Regular accessibility audits are conducted to ensure
that our infrastructure is accessible to differently-abled employees. The World
Disability Day is celebrated at all our campuses to create awareness and foster
inclusion. Policies are enhanced / changed keeping in mind the special needs of
differently‑abled employees.

Social contract | 21

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Resource group

Area of influence

Highlights

Infosys Women's
Inclusivity Network
(IWIN)

Employee resource group
for gender inclusion

IWIN works towards creating a gender-sensitive and inclusive work environment
for women employees and develops them for managerial and leadership roles,
thereby maintaining gender ratios at all levels in the organization. We enable
the advancement of women executives by providing greater flexibility, exclusive
training, mentoring and experience sharing programs for developing stronger
networks. IWIN continues to partner with gender networks and forums across the
globe to benchmark practices specific to the development, engagement, growth and
retention of women employees.

Samaritans Network

Group of volunteers
counseling on
life challenges

A peer group of volunteers trained in barefoot counseling spend time listening
to, empathizing with, supporting and counseling fellow employees, helping
them cope with life's challenges, mostly personal in nature. These Samaritan
volunteers perform this activity over and above their regular jobs. This initiative
is a first‑of‑its‑kind in India and is active at seven of our campuses and had
positive outcomes for over 1,300 employees so far. Network members also support
employees with severe depression or mental health-related concerns by assisting the
human resources department and counselors to identify and refer such employees
for further treatment. Samaritans are also engaged in awareness initiatives and
conducting internal workshops on listening, basic counseling skills and addressing
issues related to depression and suicidal tendencies.

Work-life balance
The role of professionals in the current social environment demands
flexibility in managing an optimal work-life balance. Helping
employees attain personal as well as professional goals creates an
engaged workforce. It is this social responsibility that enterprises today
are addressing through various work-life balance programs.
We have a dedicated team within our Human Resources (HR) group
to assess the needs of our workforce. The following are our significant
HR policies that support work-life balance and inclusivity :
•	 Paid maternity leave
•	 Extended maternity leave
•	 Sabbatical for personal reasons (1)
•	 Paternity leave
•	 Adoption leave
•	 Part-time, flexi-hours and selective telecommuting
•	 Sabbatical for community service
•	 Sabbatical for higher education
•	 Work options from satellite offices
•	 Work from home

The following are learning avenues for our employees within
the organization :

Foundation
program
Learning
credits

Continuous
education

Talent
enablement
Higher
education

Research
Collaborative
learning

	 Sabbatical for personal reasons includes leave taken by new parents, or those on account
of sickness, adoption and travel with spouse to onsite location.

(1)

Talent enablement

Continuous education

The Education Training and Assessment (ETA) department is one of
our key business enabling competency development units. We align
our activities to benefit our business by fostering an enterprise‑wide
environment for knowledge acquisition, dissemination and
management. ETA has over 2,000 learning programs and interventions
that cover the entire competency spectrum, including technical,
managerial, process skills, industry domain knowledge and leadership
skills both for our employees and for our strategic clients. The training
requirements of our employees are assessed based on roles, domain
and individual competency needs. ETA focuses on talent development
and facilitates the Foundation Program, Continuous Education and
Outreach Programs.

Our continuous education programs span domains such as technology,
business, process and behavior, and are designed to keep the
competencies of our experienced employees current and relevant to
business needs. The systems and processes for knowledge management
create an ecosystem for knowledge sharing across the organization.

22 | Social contract

The Company is an equal opportunity employer and provides training
to all employees and does not differentiate based on gender. Hence,
no information is captured specifically on training efforts by gender.
We do not have transition programs for the management of career
endings resulting from retirements.

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

The average training effort across all employee categories is as follows :
Employee category

2014
Training
days

Employee
count
Associate
Middle
Senior
Top Management
Others (1)
Total

80,593 20,14,424
57,709 2,54,015
21,635
59,295
468
229
–
–
1,60,405

Average
training
days
25.00
4.40
2.74
0.49
–

2013
Training
days

Employee
count

76,372 11,27,293
57,997 2,16,923
20,681
48,320
447
432
1,191
–
1,56,688

Average
training
days
14.76
3.74
2.34
0.97
–

Employee
count

2012
Training
days

80,231 19,39,390
50,682 1,45,008
18,628
40,666
453
142
–
–
1,49,994

Average
training
days
24.17
2.86
2.18
0.31
–

Notes :	 Scope : There are specialized enabling programs for the top leadership, such as coaching, mentoring and one-on-one development, which are not included in the table.
	 (1)	 Lodestone Holding AG became a subsidiary of the Infosys group during fiscal year 2013.

0.97

2.74
2.34

2.18

3.74

0.31

0.49

14.76

2.86

24.17

25.00

4.40

Average training days – employees

2012

2013

2014

Associate

2012

2013

2014

Middle

2012

2013

2014

Senior

2012

2013

2014

Top

The Foundation Program

Collaborative learning

The Foundation Program is a flagship program that has received
recognition from the American Society for Talent and Development
(ASTD). This 21-week-long residential training program for
engineering graduates has helped us train software engineers who are
hired directly from colleges. This program has been evaluated by the
Federation of International Services (FIS), U.S., and is considered
equivalent to a B.Sc. in computer science (recognized by universities
in the U.S.). On an average, 15,000 to 16,000 graduates were trained
over the last three years at the Global Education Center (GEC) in
our Mysore campus. During fiscal year 2014, about 12,000 freshers
were trained.

Knowledge Management : Collaboration through knowledge-sharing is
an important component of learning and education. A primary goal of
our Knowledge Management (KM) strategy has been the creation of an
ecosystem for continuous employee education that effectively combines
formal, semi-formal and informal learning to enable the sustenance
of organizational productivity, efficiency and quality in the face of a
rapid growth in numbers. Accordingly, several KM solutions have been
deployed over the years, individually or in combination with others,
to aid the knowledge-based actions of employees in the broad areas
of technology, methodology and industry domains. These solutions
are made available through multiple channels and are accessible in
different modes to ease collaboration across the organization.
We have provided several knowledge management and collaboration
channels to leverage organizational knowledge. The participation
across these channels during fiscal year 2014 is as follows :
KM Portal (KShop) : A searchable knowledge repository of about
86,000 artifacts, which recorded 1.3 million artifact downloads from
102,000 employees.
Konnect : A professional networking platform which recorded over
2.5 million activities from nearly 94,000 employees.
TeamWiki : An exclusive Wiki-based solution for team collaboration
with versatile site customization and an ability to provide fine-grained
access restrictions on views and edits. About one million activities were
recorded from over 24,000 employees.

Participants in the Foundation Program at Infosys’ Mysore campus

KMail : A semi-automatic query-answering engine, where subject
matter experts provide timely responses to business-critical queries.
Over 680,000 activities were recorded from 8,700 employees.

Social contract | 23

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Each of these solutions is branded suitably and diligently deployed
through intense interactions with employees across the world as part of
our interventions into client projects. We have received many awards
for KM from the external benchmarking agency, the KNOW network
including nine Global MAKE (Most Admired Knowledge Enterprise)
Awards, 11 Asian MAKE Awards and nine Indian MAKE Awards over
the last decade.

The details of the two patents granted in fiscal year 2014 are as follows :
Patent
Patent No.
Method for eye
US8509541 B2
detection for a given
face

Learning through research
We believe that investments in research and development lead to
path‑breaking solutions and innovative ideas that differentiate our
services and offerings not only to our clients, but also to the society.
In fiscal year 2014, our e-commerce research lab was granted two
patents, published two books, two journals and six conference papers.
Some of the areas in which research was carried out are face-recognition
algorithms, mechanism design and game theory applications, and
social media analysis.

Method for
pre‑processing
an image in facial
recognition system

Inventors
Ravindra Babu
Tallamraju,
Subrahmanya
Sreenivasan
Venkateshaiah,
Mahalakshmi
Kalmanje
US20120301020 B2 Ravindra Babu
Tallamraju,
Subrahmanya
Sreenivasan
Venkateshaiah,
Chethan Shikaripur
Annajirao Danivas,
Mahalakshmi
Kalmanje, Pavitra
Chandrappa

Higher education opportunities for employees
We encourage our employees to pursue higher education programs offered in part-time / distance learning mode by reputed educational institutes.
The objective of our Higher Education Support (HES) policy is to enhance the competency and qualifications of our employees and expose them
to global standards of education. As part of this policy, our ETA department identifies high quality, part-time / distance learning programs at
reputed educational institutes and promotes these among employees. The number of employees who benefitted from the HES policy are as follows :
Particulars
Number of students registered for HES Program
Cumulative numbers supported

2013-14
271
1,213

2012-13
306
932

2011-12
228
626

2010-11
118
398

2009-10
143
280

We work with reputed educational institutes in India and from other parts of the world to develop collaborative programs. One such example is
the master's degree programs developed in collaboration with Coventry University, U.K. The university enabled a ‘Work-Based Learning Credit
System’ for our employees. This is a cost-effective international degree program. This model is a trendsetter for industry-academia collaboration
for employee development and is a first-of-its-kind in Global Applied Engineering Education.
As per our policy, employees can avail themselves of an extended leave of up to two years to pursue higher education at reputed educational institutions.

Competency Development Program (CDP 3.0)
It has always been our endeavor to enhance the competencies and capabilities of our employees. We rolled out a holistic Competency Development
Program 3.0 (CDP 3.0) in 2011. CDP 3.0 is a learning credit point system, which brings relevance and flexibility in competency development for
a role along multiple competency dimensions. The credit point system is aligned to an employee's role tenure. The average prescribed / estimated
learning effort across all employee categories up to senior level, is computed based on the CDP 3.0 credit point mechanism. The credits earned
by employees through CDP 3.0 are as follows :
Employee category
Employee
count

Associate
Middle
Senior

80,593
57,709
21,635

2014
Estimated
Average
learning effort learning effort
(in days) across learning
group
208,906
2.59
180,035
3.12
27,643
1.28
(1)

Employee
count

76,372
57,997
20,681

2013
Estimated
Average
learning effort learning effort
(in days) across learning
group
286,783
3.76
252,572
4.35
46,922
2.27
(1)

	 We have specialized programs for the top leadership and the 468 employees in top category are not included above.

(1)

Code of Conduct and Ethics
We believe that converting good governance into action by employees on an everyday basis is critical to building an ethical organization. To achieve
this, a strong and well-articulated Code of Conduct and Ethics, which also outlines anti-bribery provisions, has been put in place. This is
communicated to all employees worldwide through training and awareness programs, both online and instructor-led, using multiple learning
media. The programs include talks by leaders, contests, blogs, portals, and a popular ‘Do you know?’ series that ensures the dissemination of
updated information at regular intervals. Every employee compulsorily attends a session on values during his or her induction and acknowledges
the Code of Conduct and Ethics through a sign-up process. A Whistleblower Policy, a strong grievance redressal body, an uncompromising stand
on value transgressions, and supportive ecosystems encourage a culture of disclosure.

24 | Social contract

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Leadership development

Equal opportunity

The Infosys Leadership Institute (ILI) was established in early 2001
with a mission to sustain Infosys with transformational leadership for
future years. ILI focuses on grooming and coaching the title holders
in the organization to prepare them for future leadership positions.

We are committed to providing a work environment free of
discrimination and harassment. The Company is an equal opportunity
employer and makes employment decisions based on merit and
business needs. The Company policy prohibits harassment of any kind,
including harassment based on pregnancy, childbirth or related medical
conditions, race, religious creed, color, gender identity, national origin
or ancestry, physical or mental disability, medical condition, marital
status, age, sexual orientation, or any other basis protected by federal,
state, or local law or ordinance or regulation. Any such harassment
is unlawful. The Company's anti‑discrimination and anti-harassment
policy applies to all persons involved in the operation of the Company
and prohibits harassment by any employee of the Company towards
other employees, including supervisors, outside vendors, and clients.
It also prohibits discrimination or harassment based on the perception
that anyone has any of the characteristics mentioned above, or is
associated with a person who has or is perceived as having any of these
characteristics. The Company believes in equal work opportunities for
all employees and does not condone favoritism or the appearance of
favoritism at the workplace. Equal opportunity and fair treatment are
part of our Code of Conduct to which all employees subscribe. One of
the core values of the organization is excellence, and the selection,
compensation and career progression of employees is based on merit.

Performance and career management
We offer a comprehensive suite of programs, policies, tools and
interventions that facilitate robust performance and career management
for our global workforce.
All employees have clearly articulated goals for performance.
A half‑yearly appraisal allows employees to formally take stock of
their performance and report on milestones at the halfway mark.
The annual performance appraisal helps set new goals and identifies
competency development needs through the Individual Development
Program (IDP). All our employees received a formal performance
appraisal and review during the reporting period.
A management and leadership 360 degree feedback enables managers
and leaders to get a holistic view of their performance. It helps them
to take appropriate actions for enhancing skills and competencies
identified through due analysis of the feedback. Our  career
development program encourages a partnership between employees
and the organization with the following objectives :
•	 Encourage employees to take ownership of their careers by charting
their career paths based on their aspirations
•	 Design and offer opportunities to develop capabilities and
competencies, and provide a well-rounded career experience for
our employees
•	 Guide employees on capabilities, competencies, career opportunities,
optimal roles, and career objectives
•	 Enable managers to support employees in the process of career
development by providing guidance
We have launched a fast-track promotion program this year.
High‑performers will immensely benefit from this initiative as career
progressions would be reviewed on a quarterly basis going forward.
As an organization that values partnerships, we also have a series of
programs that are extended to our key suppliers and contractors.
Refer to the Responsible Supply Chain section in this report for more details.

Human rights
We respect the equal and inalienable human rights of all our
stakeholders. Being in the consulting, technology and outsourcing
industry, which is highly people dependent, ensuring there are no
violations on account of human rights is critical to our business.
As a signatory to the United Nations Global Compact (UNGC), we are
committed to respecting and supporting the fundamental principles
contained in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UNHRC).
We ensure compliance with all human rights laws and guidelines laid
down in the Constitution of India, and international laws.
Further to our philosophy of fairness, we have an effective mechanism
to deal with human rights issues across our operations globally.
We  have an effective human rights statement, which governs and
provides a framework for due diligence and assessment of risk and
opportunities related to human rights.
Refer to the Equal Opportunity and Talent Management sections of this
report for more details on human rights at Infosys.
Refer to Responsible Supply Chain section of this report for more details on
human rights-related disclosures for our supply chain.

Diversity and inclusion
Our employees represent people from diverse nationalities, age groups,
cultures, employment histories, and levels of physical ability. We use a
multi-pronged approach to promote diversity and inclusivity within
the organization. The principles and goals of the Universal Declaration
of Human rights are at the center of our Diversity and Inclusion
(D&I) strategy. Our diversity and inclusion approach is incremental
and business-driven. Our Diversity and Inclusion Office works with
a vision  “to create an inclusive workplace and leverage the power of
D&I for sustainable competitive advantage, where employees from
different backgrounds have the opportunity to participate, develop
and contribute freely and equitably.”
We implement our diversity goals through ‘ACTION’, which stands
for Auditing inclusivity and diversity levels, Creating change agents,
Training managers, Initiating and implementing work models,
Organizing and assisting affinity groups, and Networking with external
bodies to benchmark practices. Some of our diversity initiatives
conducted across our campuses in fiscal year 2014 include :
•	 Drama-based diversity and inclusion sensitization sessions for
senior managers and unit diversity council members
•	 Interactive sessions on the topics, ‘Interacting with Teenagers’,
‘Harmony in relationships’, ‘Teaching children personal safety –
Helping children be safe’ for Infoscion parents
•	 Sessions on ‘Role of an ally in inclusion of employees from the LGBT
community at the workplace’
•	 Sessions on ‘Demystifying Disability – Fostering Inclusion’
Refer to the Responsible Supply Chain section in this report for more details
on inclusive practices in our supply chain.

Infyability
We endeavor to make our Company a diverse and inclusive workplace
where every individual feels valued and respected. Creating a strong
support system for the differently-abled has been one of the strategic
agendas of the diversity team. Infyability is an employee resource
group formed in 2011, for employees with disability that aims to
create a safe, accessible and inclusive work environment. It addresses
specific needs in the recruitment, development, engagement, growth,
and retention of employees with disability and promotes an inclusive
workplace where skills and knowledge of each employee are valued
and respected.

Social contract | 25

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

We have a special loan scheme for differently-abled employees to
enable them to procure life-enhancing equipment. The Company also
provides special accessories and tools to employees with special needs
to improve accessibility and to create an inclusive culture.

Infosys Women Inclusivity Network (IWIN)
Our gender diversity practices seek to address the needs specific to
the development, engagement, growth and retention of women, and
promote a workplace culture where the potential of women employees
is leveraged and every woman feels valued, heard and fully involved
with the Company. The IWIN network conducted the following
workshops and initiatives in fiscal year 2014 :
•	 Focused leadership programs for women employees, offered in
partnership with the Indian Institute of Management – Ahmedabad
(IIM-A) and Manipal Global Education Services in India, to enhance
leadership competencies among women.
•	 We engaged in gender conversations at various external forums such
as Catalyst, the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) and National
Association of Software Companies (NASSCOM) to build a case for
inclusivity at the workplace.
•	 Featured articles and discussions on parenting, pregnancy and safety
have helped increase awareness among employees on these topics.
•	 Leading women achievers such as Sangeeta Talwar, Independent
Director, Manipal Global Education Services; Oksana Sokolovsky,
Senior Director, Head of Quality Control, Deutsche Bank; Karen
Nocket, Vice President, Enterprise Services, Toyota Motor Sales,
USA; Clara M. Connolly, General Manager, Information Technology
Management Department, Toyota Motor Engineering and
Manufacturing North America; Melissa McClintock, Head Strategic
Sourcing, ING; Lakshmi Pratury, Founder, INKTalks; and Margaret
Patrick, VP and IT Manager Europe, Asia Pacific, and Business
Solutions, XL, were invited as speakers to interact with our women
employees as part of the ‘Inspiring Women’ series.
•	 A ‘Healthy Pregnancy’ program in partnership with United
Healthcare was launched for women employees.
•	 International Women's Day 2014 celebrations focusing on ‘Inspiring
Change’ were held across our campuses in India and overseas.

Hearing and resolving issues
We recognize the rights of our employees and provide forums, support
groups and policies to hear and address their concerns and resolve
issues or conflicts in a fair and transparent manner. The Hearing
Employees and Resolving (HEAR) forum provides a channel for
employees to air their grievances and get these addressed in a fair and
objective manner.
Our Anti-Sexual Harassment Initiative (ASHI) allows employees to
report sexual harassment cases at the workplace. We have a strong
policy on the prevention of sexual harassment at work based on the
Vishaka guidelines of the Supreme Court of India. We have further
strengthened the same as per the provisions of the Sexual Harassment
of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal)
Act, 2013. Suppliers and contract staff working on our premises are
covered under this initiative.
We have a Whistleblower Policy that assures complete anonymity and
confidentiality of information to the reporting individual.
The following table provides details on issues raised in fiscal year 2014 :
Employee concerns and grievances
Workplace harassment (1)
Workplace concerns (2)
Others (3)
Employee disciplinary issues – major (4)
Employee disciplinary issues – minor (5)
Total registered
Internal arbitration
Disciplinary action
No action needed
Total closed

Number of grievances
29
2,040
10
332
107
2,518
1,990
518
10
2,518

Notes :	 Includes only India locations
	 (1)	 Workplace harassment – Refers to significant harassment issues
	 (2)	 Workplace concerns – Refers to grievances reported by employees at the workplace
	 (3)	 Other issues – Refers to queries, clarifications and concerns that do not get
channelized as per the Company grievance mechanism
	 (4)	 Major – These cases involve reputation risk to the Company / employees, fraud or
other ethical misconduct
	 (5)	 Minor – These cases refer to misdemeanors or mistakes that can be corrected

InStep – Our global internship program
InStep is our global internship program and an integral part of the
Global Academic Relations (GAR) initiative at Infosys. Each year,
we recruit over 150 InStep interns from more than 100 leading
universities and business schools across the globe for executing
high‑impact projects for the organization. The program began in the
year 1999 under the guidance of Narayana Murthy and it has grown
from strength to strength to become a comprehensive program over
the last 14 years.

Sangeeta Talwar addressing Infosys’ women employees
All employees, in accordance with their marital status, are eligible for
parental leave as governed by the applicable laws and organizational
policies. We also provide adoption leave to employees. In fiscal year
2014, about 2,389 men availed themselves of paternity leave and
2,200 women availed themselves of maternity leave. In fiscal year
2013, about 2,776 women availed themselves of maternity leave
and 2,040 women continued working one more year after their
maternity leave ended, resulting in a return‑to‑work rate of about
74%. The return‑to‑work rate for men is nearly 100%. In addition, the
organization also provides an extended leave of up to one year, which
can be used for personal reasons including childcare.

26 | Social contract

InStep, with an alumni base of over 1,250 students, has contributed
significantly to the overall organizational growth. Interns work with us
on cutting edge research projects creating significant business value.
Since its inception, the program has been successful in filing over 25
patents and 30 research papers for prestigious Indian and international
forums, thanks to the joint efforts of the interns and project mentors.
These culturally diverse sets of students have enabled the creation of a
multicultural environment within the teams at Infosys and assisted in
the development of cultural awareness through collaboration with the
Diversity & Inclusion team. Cultural videos, language tables, insights
into business etiquette of the local country have been recorded and
showcased through various internal platforms.
One of the key highlights of the year was that InStep, won the
prestigious National Council for Work Experience (NCWE) Award
for ‘Work Placement of the Year 2013,’ in the category, ‘Best large
organization with over 250 employees (short-term placements)’ for
the second consecutive year. The judges commended Infosys for
providing a rare opportunity of cultural diversity that makes the

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

scheme particularly unique. They also praised Infosys for the three‑tier
support system and for putting considerable thought into engaging
students, despite it being a short‑term placement.
InStep has also been the starting point for a broader collaboration with
select universities. The Global Academic Relations (GAR) team runs
further initiatives such as supporting case-study writing by faculty
from distinguished schools, senior management engagement with
schools, creating goodwill with government bodies and academic
visits to our campuses.
In the last financial year, a major new strategic partnership aimed at
combating the global cyber security threat has been signed between
Queen's University, Belfast, and Infosys. The partnership will establish a
research, education and commercialization model to develop solutions
and intellectual property for combatting cyber security threats arising
out of the emergence of digital and Cloud-based business models.
InStep also continued to strengthen its tie-up with the Government
of New South Wales to hire students from Australia and provide them
with project-based IT training.
InStep will continue to be a unique program in our branding efforts.
As the London Business School's Business Strategy Review article stated,
“InStep clearly shows how an internship programme can be structured
for marketing an organization at a global level and showcasing its
uniqueness for clients and future employees.” InStep aims to broaden
its role in adding value to Infosys with its intrinsic contributions to
branding and internships.

OZONE – The Health, Safety and Environmental
Management System (HSEMS)
We have established a Health, Safety and Environmental Management
System and are certified to OHSAS 18001 specifications at most of our
campuses in India. The HSEMS initiative christened OZONE, helps us
comply with all applicable legal requirements across our operations.
The HSEMS includes well defined policies and procedures which
support the :
•	 Identification and management of hazards and risks related to
health and safety
•	 Identification and management of activities causing environmental
impacts
•	 Creation of processes for operational controls
•	 Defining HSE objectives and targets that are achieved through
management programs
•	 Identification of HSE training needs and ensuring periodic training
•	 Establishment and operation of Occupational Health and Safety
Committees
•	 Periodic review of HSE performance
Our HSEMS includes the following components :
Risk management : Risk management includes the identification
of hazards for all activities including new or modified activities,
products and services, implementation of measures to minimize or
control impacts, and monitoring the same in a structured manner.
Ergonomics-related ailments have been identified as one of the health
concerns which is prevalent in our kind of environment. Instances
of lower back pain, neck pain and wrist / finger pain get reported
frequently. Workstations and furniture are designed and procured after
considering their ergonomic advantages. Physiotherapists are available
in most campuses in India and they conduct regular sessions on back
care, posture maintenance and repetitive strain injuries.
: Occupational Health & Safety (OH&S)
Safety committee 
Committees are set up both at the corporate level and at each of our
campuses. The committees comprise employees, management and
cross-functional teams. The representation of employees in Safety
Committees is 100%. The OH&S committee brings employees and
the Management together in a non-adversarial, cooperative effort to
promote OH&S at the workplace. The committee is responsible for :
•	 Conducting investigations of reported incidents

InStep interns at the Bangalore campus

Occupational health and safety
We are committed to high standards of environmental management
and provisioning of a safe and healthy workplace for our employees,
consultants and contractors. During the year, we worked to enhance
our Health, Safety and Environmental performance through better
systems and processes and the use of technology.

•	 Assisting in the development and implementation of the best
possible OH&S policies, plans and procedures for eliminating or
minimizing the occupational risks, and providing an opportunity
for raising concerns related to health and safety
•	 Discussing, exploring and recommending solutions for various
OH&S-related issues

Social contract | 27

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Incident reporting and investigation : Incidents can be reported
by employees through an internal application and also through
mails. Incidents which are reported are investigated and analyzed
and appropriate corrective actions / preventive measures are taken
to reduce future injuries and losses. Investigations focus on root
causes and system failures. The OH&S committee is responsible for
conducting these investigations.

Communication channels on Health, Safety and
Environmental (HSE) issues

Training on Health, Safety and Environment : Training needs are
identified based on the nature of jobs, which may have a significant
impact on the environment or may pose occupational health and safety
risks. Training includes awareness building, mock drills, classroom
sessions and periodic demonstrations. HSEMS training is also a part
of employee induction programs. E-learning modules have also been
rolled out for creating awareness. In fiscal year 2014, the OHSAS
e‑learning modules was rolled out across our overseas locations.

•	 Communication from external bodies could be through email,
letters or fax. Such communication from various authorities or
other stakeholders are directed to the HSE team who record and
respond to the same.

A process for tracking and analyzing of occupational incidents has
been established. The incident, frequency and severity rates based on
the BIS (Bureau of Indian Standards – IS 3786:1983) and BLS (Bureau
of Labor Statistics – OSHA) standards for our operations over the last
four fiscal years are as follows :
Incident, frequency
and severity rates
Total no. of incidents
(OHSAS 18001:2007)
No. of lost time injuries
No. of lost days
(man days lost due to
work-related event(s)
injuries)
Frequency rate =
(No. of lost time
injuries x 1000000)
/ Man hours worked)
(IS 3786:1983)
Frequency rate = No.
of lost time injuries
x 200,000 / Hours
worked (OSHA)
Severity rate = (Man
days lost due to lost
time injury x 1000000)
/ Man hours worked
(IS 3786:1983)
Severity rate = No. of
days lost due to work
injury x 200,000 /
Hours worked (OSHA)
Incident rate / 1000
employees = (No. of
lost time injury x 1000)
/ Average number of
persons employed

External communication channel

•	 External communication received is of the following types :
–– Specific communication from interested parties
–– Communication from statutory / regulatory bodies
–– Legal notices from courts and other agencies
–– Information requests / demands for emergency planning and
other relevant issues by public authorities
Internal communication channel
•	 The HSE policy and procedures are communicated to all employees
through the OZONE portal, handouts and trainings. Email, signage
and the bulletin boards are also used as a medium of communication.

2014

2013

2012

2011

753
58

1,146
94

630
125

717
92

550

991

1,529

937

0.010

0.330

0.469

0.407

0.002

0.066

0.094

0.081

Leisure

Work environment

HALE Leisure
Hobby classes
Leisure tie-ups
Work-life balance

Ergonomics
Online engagement
Online wellness solutions
Contests
Focus on fitness

0.099

3.478

5.739

4.144

0.02

0.696

1.148

0.829

Health Assessment and Lifestyle Enrichment (HALE)
Medical research suggests a strong correlation between high work
pressure and stress (coupled with sedentary lifestyles), and heart
ailments, hypertension, depression, mental disorders, suicides,
attempts at bodily harm and many cases of marital discord and other
relationship issues. Research also attests to the fact that proactive
early interventions leading to early detection, coupled with treatment
options and lifestyle changes can contribute significantly towards
enhancing the active working age of an individual as well as directly
impact workplace productivity. In an attempt to impact health
positively and enrich the lifestyles of our employees, we launched the
HALE program across our campuses focusing on four major areas :

HALE
Health

0.459

0.766

1.096

0.935

Note :	 Scope : This data is applicable for India locations only.

We currently do not have systems in place to capture information
about absenteeism rate and occupational disease rate. A total of 155
incidents have been reported at our construction sites in 10 locations
of which five were fatalities involving contractual labor personnel.
The health and safety team, in collaboration with the internal audit
team, has embarked on several preventive measures to improve safety
at our construction sites.
Refer to the Responsible Supply Chain section of this report for more details.

28 | Social contract

The HSE team is responsible for ensuring that adequate communication
is provided to all our employees. The team also takes action on the
communication received from both internal and external bodies.

Health Assessment and
Lifestyle Enrichment

HALE Tool
Health camps
Hotline (tele-counseling)
Expert sessions
Online chat sessions
Stress Audit Tool
Health checks for family

Safety

Safety awareness
Street plays
Interaction with local police

An activity calendar is prepared each year that acts as a guideline for
activities at each Development Center (DC). This calendar is made
taking into account employee feedback through surveys and mails,

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

important days outlined by the World Health Organization (WHO),
special occasions, seasonal requirements, inputs from medical and
HSE teams and trends seen in employees' health. The calendar acts as
a guide to all HALE anchors at different locations to deploy activities
at their respective DCs to ensure maximum reach to employees
and uniformity in major offerings. DC anchors are free to conduct
initiatives in addition to the corporate calendar to make the offerings
more relevant to their location.
Over the years, we have invested in building a positive and world‑class
work environment. Interventions in the direction of building a safe
and sound workplace have been launched, including ergonomics
workshops and sessions at work stations. Taking this a step further
to encourage safe and responsible citizenship, the HALE team also
conducts other initiatives to foster social consciousness — such as
blood donation camps and safety campaigns.

Innovation and best practices
HALE Tool : This is an online tool through which employees can assess
of their mental and physical health. A customized feedback is made
available through a face-to-face meeting with a professional consultant.
Remedial interventions (cardiac check, psychological counselling,
lifestyle change, etc.) are facilitated based on the need of each case.
HALE Hotline : Provides professional counseling in times of crisis.
A  hotline facility has been made available 24 hours a day, 365
days a  year, where callers are provided instant access to a trained
professional. Through this initiative various cases have been addressed
including cases of serious mental depression, attempted suicides and
marital problems.
Stress Audit Tool : A tool that assists employees to identify their
stress levels and thereby to seek help or take appropriate measures
to improve their health.
‘Healthy You’ application : A desktop widget providing health tips at
the click of a button.
In addition to the above, we also use our communication channels
such as InfyRadio, InfyTV, blogs and mailers to spread awareness.
During fiscal year 2014, HALE has benefited over 1,25,800 employees
and their family members.
HALE also received the silver recognition at the Express IT Awards in
2013. This category of awards is open to IT companies with operations
in India who have implemented path-breaking ideas in making the
workplace employee-friendly. These ideas are expected to have helped
increase employee productivity and employee engagement, as well
as reduce attrition, manage wage expectations and contribute to the
overall employee happiness quotient.

Responsible supply chain
As an organization, we provide our clients with strategic insights to help
them transform and thrive in a changing world through consulting,
operational leadership, and the co-creation of breakthrough solutions.
Forging alliances and partnerships is therefore a strategic imperative
for us. We have a well-defined alliance strategy at the organizational
level that enables business units to chart out an alliance plan that
guides global partnerships for co-creating solutions. A strong
governance board regulates the global partnership programs. We have
documented processes to guide us through the lifecycle of selecting,
engaging, managing, assessing and terminating alliances. Risks relating
to alliances are tracked at the business unit level and get aggregated to
the Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) framework.
For more details, refer to the Risk Management Report in our Annual Report
2013-14 available on www.infosys.com.
We have a large supplier base for the procurement of goods and
services to support our operations. We recognize that suppliers are
valuable stakeholders in our business ecosystem. This has encouraged
us to strengthen our responsible supply chain practises, through the
introduction of the new vendor empanelment guidelines and supplier
code of conduct based on the environment, social and governance
(ESG) parameters.
We have had 1,357 new suppliers empanelled during fiscal year
2014. No new suppliers have been screened against the new vendor
empanelment guideline in fiscal year 2014. We engage with local
suppliers (‘local suppliers’ means India-based) for our ‘People’
and ‘Services’ categories. Our proportion of spending on domestic
suppliers at significant locations of operations was about 86% for fiscal
year 2014.
In order to strengthen responsible business practices in our
supply chain, a four-stage integrated framework called VIVA was
conceptualized in fiscal year 2013. We have a well-defined mechanism
to receive and address social and environmental grievances from all
our stakeholders. The VIVA framework includes :
Visioning – Drafting policies and guidelines and operating code for
the supply chain
Inculcating – Focusing on process improvements
Valuing – Creating awareness and providing training and
competency building
Assessing – Assessing supplier performance along environmental,
social and governance parameters.

For more details, refer to http://expressitawards.financialexpress.com.

Srikantan Moorthy receiving the Express IT Award on behalf of Infosys

Social contract | 29

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

A Responsible Supply Chain Policy that categorizes our suppliers into three broad categories — people, services and products — was launched
in 2013. A Supplier Code of Conduct was administered to all key suppliers in 2014. We also revised our empanelment guidelines in 2014.
To facilitate risk assessment, we have further classified the suppliers under 14 segments.
This year we carried out an initial risk assessment across the 14 sub‑categories of suppliers. The aspects that are significant in the supply chain
are as follows :

People

Economic
performance

Occupational
health and
safety

Training and
development

Human
rights

Equal
Compliance and opportunity
/
anti-corruption
inclusivity

Resource
conservation

Technical contractors
Non-technical
contractors
Construction
Transportation

Services

Food and beverages
Management services
Technical services
Maintenance services
Communication and
Internet

Hardware

Products

Software
Electrical and heavy
equipment
Stationery
Construction materials /
Interiors

Based on an initial screening exercise, we have identified Health
and Safety and Compliance to Labor Laws as critical aspects for all
segments under the people and services categories. These can have a
negative impact on our brand reputation.
To comply with local legislations applicable in the regions of our
operations, we sign the Master Service Agreements (MSA) with all our
vendors. The MSA mandates the vendor to abide by the regulatory and
governmental laws applicable. We also expect our suppliers to support
and respect the protection of internationally proclaimed human rights
and to ensure that they are not complicit in human rights abuses.
Our contracts have appropriate clauses and checks to prevent the
employment of child labor or forced labor in any form.
We have over 15,000 contractual staff working on our campuses.
A  strong governance process and independent checks support a
regular bi-monthly audit of our supplier agencies by evaluating the
data shared by them with various labor laws including the Minimum
Wages Act, Payment of Wages Act, Payment of Bonus Act, ESI, EPF, etc.
Grievances are addressed through appropriate mechanisms available to
our contractual staff. Medical claim and insurance policies safeguard
their interests. We intend to extend this audit to our suppliers of
services in the coming year.

30 | Social contract

In an attempt to engage proactively with our suppliers and to inculcate
responsible business practices in the entire supplier lifecycle, we
published a ‘Best Practices’ document highlighting Our commitments
and actions as a signatory to the UNGC principles. This document was
shared with suppliers in the people and services category, covering
about 291 suppliers.
All our service suppliers working on campus providing us with
maintenance, transportation, catering and technical services are covered
under our HSE-related training, along with our employees. In 2014,
893 Health, Safety and Environmental sessions were conducted.
Through these engagements to build awareness, we have covered
eight out of the 14 supplier segments, approximately 57% of our
supplier segments.

Construction site improvements
This year, we performed a safety audit on our construction services
supplier. Eleven onsite safety audits were conducted by our internal
quality team at our India locations. With these audit checks, we have
covered two (non-technical contract agencies and construction) out of
our 14 supplier segments constituting 14% of our supplier segments.

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Quarterly safety incident
trend at construction sites

Q1

Q2

Q3

26

28

36

Some of the best practices that have been included are :
•	 A mandatory vertigo test for all workers.
•	 Hand rails both on top and the middle for barricading slab edges
and staircases.
•	 100% Personnel Protective Equipment (PPE) compliance at all our
sites; this includes subcontractors and vendors.
•	 Double lanyards for all those working above 1.8 meters.
•	 First-aid facility from a certified professional at all sites, throughout
the duration of the work.
•	 Emergency vehicles / ambulances stationed round the clock at
all sites.
•	 Noise and emission monitoring for all generator sets.
•	 A certificate from the Pollution Control Board (PCB) and vehicle
insurance for all vehicles operating within the sites.

With the initiatives we have taken in the past year, the overall incidents
reported on our construction sites have come down significantly.
The  quarterly safety incident trend for fiscal year 2014 is as follows :

65

This year, we launched the ‘Infosys Construction safety manual’ for all
vendors, towards achieving minimum reportable accidents.

Q4

In addition to the above, we have carried out a series of inspections.
Food inspections were carried out by catering committees (that has
representation from the facilities department and employees in all
campuses) on food and beverage suppliers. Vehicle inspections were
carried out on transportation suppliers to assess the quality of the
vehicles provided for employee commute.

Construction in progress at our Mysore campus
We have also launched welfare facilities for construction workers at
our building projects :
•	 Living conditions have been improved by providing proper quarters,
adequate toilets, ceiling / wall fans, and necessary washing areas.
Clean drinking water is also being provided.
•	 A separate kitchen has been constructed at our workers’ colony to
discourage cooking inside rooms. The cost of LPG cylinders used
in the kitchen is being borne by Infosys.
•	 We have also provided a school facility at our Mysore campus for
the children of the construction workers.

This year, we also launched a self-assessment tool to gauge supplier
performance using ESG (Environmental, Social and Governance)
parameters. This assessment was administered to key product
suppliers. We intend to analyze the results of the self-assessment to
chalk out a strategy to engage with our product suppliers who are
outside the boundaries of our operations.
In line with our philosophy of equal opportunity and inclusivity,
we track the business we do in India, under the MSMED Act, and
in the U.S. under the MBE / WBE group. We intend to strengthen
our diversity and inclusion practices in our supply chain in the
coming year.
We propose to baseline data to ascertain the impact of our suppliers
on the environment and device a strategy to engage and influence
conservation of resources efforts in the supply chain.

School for the children of construction workers at our Mysore campus

Social contract | 31

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Community impact
As an organization, we are responsible towards all our stakeholders, investors, clients, employees, vendors / partners, governments and
communities. A key aspect of honoring our social contract is to work in the area of community development, particularly in education and the
creation of jobs through direct and indirect investment of time, effort, and funds. This is done through direct monetary support, organization-led
projects, employee-driven initiatives and our community empathy policy.

Infosys Foundation
Infosys Foundation (‘the Foundation’) prides itself on working with the rural community and underserved section of the society, selecting projects
with care and working in areas that have not received adequate attention and funding.
In 2014, the Foundation focused on the following infrastructure investments :
A dharmashala (dormitory) was built for the KIMS hospital in Hubli, south Karnataka. The 32,000 sq. ft. dharmashala, built at a cost of
US $910,000 can house 225 people at any given point of time. Attendants of patients visiting the KIMS hospital will be able to use this facility
during the period of treatment. This is the third such attendant-friendly accommodation that the Foundation has built in the state, and the first
in North Karnataka. The other two are in Bangalore — at the Kidwai Cancer Hospital and at NIMHANS.
A school building with a capacity to educate over 1,000 children was constructed at a cost of about US $820,000 in the Dharmapuri district of
Tamil Nadu.
For more details on the Foundation's philosophy and activities, refer to www.infosysfoundation.com.

	
Students at Isha Vidyalaya school, an Infosys Foundation project

	

Dharmashala funded by Infosys Foundation at KIMS Hospital, Hubli

Infosys Science Foundation
During the year, the Infosys Science Foundation (ISF) announced seven winners of the Infosys Prize 2013 across six categories — Engineering and
Computer Science, Humanities, Life Sciences, Mathematical Sciences, Physical Sciences and Social Sciences. The winners were recognized for their
outstanding achievements and contributions to scientific research. The ISF also announced an increase in the prize purse by US $100,000, taking
the prize amount to US $900,000 for each category. The award ceremony was held on February 8, 2014 in Bangalore where Dr. Kofi A. Annan,
former Secretary General of the United Nations, felicitated the winners. As of fiscal year 2014, a total of 32 winners have been recognized since
the inception of the Infosys Prize.
ISF also celebrated its fifth anniversary by releasing an e-book, encapsulating the work of all the laureates till date through graphic stories. The print
version of the book was circulated to the libraries in schools covered under the Catch Them Young program of Infosys.
For more details, refer to www.infosys-science-foundation.com.

	
Nayanjot Lahiri receiving the Infosys Prize 2013 in Humanities
(Archaeology) from Kofi Annan
	

32 | Social contract

Kofi Annan, Narayana Murthy and jury chairs with the fifth
anniversary commemorative book at the Infosys Prize ceremony

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Infosys USA Foundation
In 2014, the Infosys USA Foundation continued its association with
the New York Academy of Sciences in sponsoring STEM initiatives
across schools in New York. Discussions are on with the Girl Scouts to
expand the reach of the STEM mentoring programs across all the states
of the U.S. The team also participated in revitalizing schools across
the boroughs of New York City and in Newark, New Jersey, under the
aegis of Martin Luther King's Day of Service and New York Cares Day.

Empowering through education

This year, over 65,000 students participated in Aspirations2020 from
16 Indian states. Details of the event are as follows :
Item
Students registered
Number of teams participating in the college rounds
Number of teams participating in DC / State finals
Number of teams qualifying for ACM-ICPC
Number of teams qualifying for ACM-ICPC Onsite
Contest

We believe that education provides the best foundation for leading
a purposeful life. Through our organization-led projects, we have
successfully harnessed our reach and resources to encourage students
in rural India to pursue higher education, provide infrastructure for
government schools, and train faculty across schools and colleges.
We work closely with educational institutions across the country to
improve access to and quality of education offered in schools and
universities.

96,570
2009

2010

2011

45,611

34,576

65,241
17,200

2008

22,982

9,550

For effective and fast-paced learning the CC program also organizes
conclaves, road shows at institutions, faculty enablement programs,
industrial visits for students and faculty, seminars and workshops,
programming contests for students, sabbaticals, technical events,
research paper sponsorships and soft-skills training for students and
faculty members.

15

Student participation in Aspirations2020

Campus Connect
As a primary stakeholder in creating a vibrant talent pool of future
engineering graduates, we launched Campus Connect (CC) in May
2004, a first-of-its-kind industry-academia partnership program. CC
aims to be a forum where some of our best practices can be shared
with institutions. CC also helps align the needs of institutions, faculty
and students with those of the IT industry to raise the employability
of engineering students.

2013-14
65,241
63,444
243
81

2012

2013

2014

We are also working with autonomous engineering institutions across
the country to co-create industry electives in the areas of foundational
Computer Science, soft-skills and advanced topics like Business
Intelligence and Enterprise Architecture. Many of these co‑created
electives have already been included in the curricula of several
institutions.
For more details on Campus Connect, visit https://campusconnect.
infosys.com.

Aspirations2020
In 2007, Campus Connect launched Aspirations2020, a programming
contest series aimed at fostering creativity, teamwork and innovation
in building new software programs. The contest helps students test
their ability to perform in challenging situations, and thus replicates
an industry environment. This contest is held in collaboration with
the Association for Computing Machinery International Collegiate
Programming Contest (ACM-ICPC) that focuses on execution
excellence in demonstrating competencies needed for young engineers.

The 2013 winners of Aspirations2020

Social contract | 33

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

SPARK

Imbibing social leadership

SPARK, launched in 2008, is a day-long program aimed at raising
the aspirations of students across the country. The SPARK portfolio
includes three programs, Rural Reach Program (RRP), Catch Them
Young (CTY) and SPARK Guru.

I, Citizen of Earth (iCOE) is the Infosys program to build a culture of
responsible citizenship among Infoscions around the world. Through
iCOE, we aim to do the following :

Rural Reach Program (RRP) : This one-day program is aimed at
creating awareness about computers and the power of IT among rural
school children in India. Infosys Computer Donation program donates
personal computers to schools under the RRP program. Based on the
end-of-use earmarked for the computers, the schools are also provided
necessary guidance on safe disposal of e-waste. The target audience for
the RRP comprises students from rural government schools within 50
to 150 km radius of our campuses.

•	 Enable voluntary efforts to integrate with the vision and sustainability
goals of the Company

Catch Them Young (CTY) : CTY is a 10-day summer vacation program
held at our campuses which aims to expose bright urban youth to
the world of IT. This program is targeted at eighth-grade meritorious
students, who are selected through a test and are trained by faculty
members from our ETA department.
SPARK Guru

•	 Envision a common purpose for the larger ecosystem

•	 Engage with Infoscions to help them become change agents and
ambassadors for a better tomorrow
•	 Embed a culture of global citizenship and innovation for sustainable
development
We believe responsible citizenship behaviors can be developed through
social leadership competencies. We set up InFLUENCE (Infosys
Framework for Learning Using External Community Engagement),
a framework to recognize employee volunteering efforts and to develop
social empathy. Through InFLUENCE, employees can get additional
learning credit under our Competency Development Program 3.0 for
their volunteering efforts.

This program focuses on teachers from government schools and helps
them augment their knowledge and enhance their teaching skills with
respect to current industry needs.
As part of SPARK, we engaged with over 36,000 students during
the year. Since its launch in 2008, the program has reached over
8,78,000 students.

The Samarpan CSR team from Bangalore donated solar-powered UPS
to schools in need

SPARK RRP program session in progress

34 | Social contract

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Employee volunteer groups
We actively support employee-volunteer groups with the intent of inculcating the spirit of volunteerism among our employees. Many of these
groups have taken on local social causes and have consistently worked towards addressing the needs of the underserved. The volunteering
activities our employee-volunteer groups across the globe for fiscal year 2014 are as follows :
Campus
Bangalore

Trust
Samarpan

Details
•	 Stem cell awareness programs were conducted to clear the myths around stem cell donation and
highlight the requirements and benefits of donating stem cells
•	 Study materials were distributed to 50,000 children under the Notebook Drive.
•	 Solar-powered UPS units were donated to schools in need, benefiting around 320 children.
•	 4.26 tonnes of pulses were collected through the ‘plate to slate’ initiative to support Akshaya
Patra, an NGO which runs mid-day meal schemes in several government schools across India.
•	 Two blood donation camps were conducted, with around 1,050 employees donating blood
•	 Around 27,680 students benefited from the ‘Reach and teach’ program, an initiative that aims at
providing education for rural children.

Bhubaneshwar

Akanksha

•	 700 children were benefitted by the Notebook Drive, a program to provides notebooks and
stationery to underprivileged students.
•	 6,800 families affected by the floods in Orissa were helped by the Flood Relief Distribution
initiative.
•	 120 children from the Adruta children's home were insured for health emergencies.
•	 500 students were benefitted by Pratibha Poshak, a scholarship program for students in need.

Chennai

Sneham

•	 Offered scholarships to help 556 children of the Company's support staff meet their academic
fee requirements for the year.

Hyderabad

Mamatha

•	 25 children of our support staff — including housekeepers, gardeners, and security-persons —
were funded through the Shiksha Scholarship program to help them meet their academic fee
requirements for the year.
•	 Self-defense workshops were conducted for 150 women employees and housekeeping staff as
part of the personal safety initiative.
•	 A dental camp was conducted within the local community, covering about 204 patients, of
which 102 received treatment.
•	 Four blood donation drives were conducted for the treatment of thalassemia patients. A total of
1,700 units of blood was collected through this drive.
•	 Conducted ‘Job Mela’, a recruitment drive, in two villages, with a participation of 239 applicants
that resulted in 73 employments.

Mangalore

Prerana

•	 About US $3,000 was contributed in medical aid to economically underprivileged patients
•	 Scholarships worth US $23,511 were offered to 328 students, including 67 students who are
pursuing professional courses till date.
•	 Gifts were sponsored for 836 kids from 15 childcare homes in Mangalore. With the overall
sponsorship amounting to about US $5,000, this program has been successfully executed for the
sixth consecutive year.
•	 60 units of blood were collected and donated through two blood donation camps held at the
campus.

Mysore

Soften

•	 A notebook and stationery distribution drive was conducted, covering 31 schools and benefiting
about 10,000 students.
•	 Scholarships were provided for children of Mysore DC support staff members, covering about
142 students
•	 An eye donation awareness program was conducted, which helped raise about 272 registrations,
besides carrying out eye check-up for over 725 students from government schools.
•	 75 artificial limbs were donated under the ‘Artificial Limb Donation’ program, in association
with the Rotary Mysore Mahaveer Artificial Limb Centre.

Pune

Sparsh, healing
touch

•	 The construction of a school in Mann village, Pune, was funded through the ‘My School’ project.

Social contract | 35

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Campus
Trust
Thiruvananthapuram Sanjeevani

Details
•	 Notebooks and stationery items were donated through the Notebook Drive to about 10,000
students from government / government-aided schools.
•	 Around 60 signboards on biodegradable waste segregation were donated to the Medical College
Hospital, Thiruvananthapuram.
•	 Around 1,000 Christmas wishes of the less-privileged children from about 20 institutions in and
around Thiruvananthapuram were fulfilled through the ‘Make A Wish’ program.
•	 Regular weekend classes were conducted at Prathibha Poshini and Abhaya (homes for destitute
children) to enhance their knowledge of English and Mathematics.
•	 Career orientation sessions were conducted in two government schools in Thiruvananthapuram.
•	 Sanjeevani volunteers undertook the cleaning of the SAT Hospital premises as part of its
cleanliness drive.
•	 Onam meal was sponsored for 1,460 individuals from 24 organizations across Kerala and Tamil
Nadu

The Samarpan CSR team from Bangalore volunteered at the Government Middle School, Bangarpet, under the ‘Reach and Teach’ program

36 | Social contract

The Mamatha CSR team from Hyderabad painted the interiors of the
RGK Primary School, Annojiguda, Hyderabad

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Infosys wins Australian CSR award
At Infosys Australia, we began a comprehensive review and
revitalization of our CSR program in 2010, after which the geo CSR
Committee (a group of management and employee representatives)
re-launched the program through multiple channels. Employee focus
groups during the review phase identified volunteering as the key
to building employee connection, and so a significant investment
was made by the Company to assign one day of paid volunteer leave
per employee to enable their involvement in charity activities, and
in updating our online leave system to make applying for volunteer
leave a simple and streamlined process for employees, regardless of
work location.
Building volunteering effort was cross-referenced with focus group
findings to comprise a three-tier approach :
Volunteering guidance from the organization : Volunteering by Infosys
Australia employees has increased from zero to over 70 employees
so far. This  has been particularly driven by our three-year charity
partnership with Ozanam House, a St.  Vincent De Paul facility
supporting homeless people in Melbourne. This partnership involved
Infosys volunteers helping out in the Ozanam House kitchen each
month to prepare meals for homeless people in Melbourne. We are
currently in the process of establishing a similar partnership in
Sydney to provide regular volunteering opportunities for New South
Wales‑based employees.

Infosys Australia employees with the Ian Kiernan Award for Corporate
Social Responsibility

Leading by example : Our employees indicated they wanted more
visible involvement from geo leadership in CSR initiatives. In addition
to acting as the sponsor for the CSR Committee, our Senior Vice
President and Geo Head, Jackie Korhonen, has become an active
participant in activities including the CEO Sleepout and Mother's Day
Fun Run to raise awareness and funds to benefit the homeless and
breast cancer causes respectively.
Endorsing employee-led social consciousness activities : Research
indicated that employees wanted to be more involved in deciding the
direction of CSR efforts. With this in mind, we supported employees
who drive their own social consciousness initiatives. Corporate
support ranges from company donations and paid volunteer leave
to promoting charity activities within our internal communications
network. For example, since 2011, our employees have been regular
participants in ‘Random Hacks of Kindness’ events, a project led by
global technology and community experts who collaborate to develop
software and solutions to respond to emergency situations across the
globe.
In addition to volunteering, 680 employees from the Australian
geography have participated in CSR activities as organizers, donors,
participants or leading their own social consciousness initiatives.
For more details refer to http://www.awards.ahri.com.au.

Volunteers from Infosys Australia at the Ozanam House kitchen in
Melbourne

Social contract | 37

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

‘My School’ initiative by employees in Pune
‘My School’ is an initiative anchored by a group of self-motivated employees from our Pune development center. Encouraged and supported
by the senior leadership and the Infosys Foundation, ‘My School’ is now a reality. The idea was seeded by our Executive Vice Chairman,
S. Gopalakrishnan, when he recommended that Sparsh – A Healing Touch, the CSR wing of Pune DC, should try to help the villages in and
around Hinjewadi. Sparsh has been working in the area of education for a long time and the team realized that the Mann school would benefit
immensely from its support.
The core team started with providing raincoats and school bags to the children and a water filter to the school to help increase the attendance
of students, before they realized that basic amenities like benches and desks were absent in the school. Students would have to sit on the bare
floor which would get terribly cold during winter and the monsoons. The leaking roofs would make life even more difficult during the rains.
With support from the Infosys Foundation, the group donated benches and desks to the school. It also felt the need for a proper school building
with basic sanitation facilities to arrest the drop-out rate among children, especially girls.
Sharad Pawar, former cabinet minister for agriculture, consumer affairs, food and public distribution, inaugurated the school on October 16, 2013.
15,000 employees from the Pune DC and Infosys Foundation contributed towards the building of the school with 10 classrooms, computer lab,
pantry, staff room and a library. The overall cost of the building was US $230,000 and more than half of it came from employee contributions,
including amounts donated by security staff. The core team, consisting of 14 people and over 100 volunteers, worked tirelessly for two years to
make the dream a reality.
Infosys Pune DC was recognized for its CSR effort through employee initiatives by the Maharashtra Chamber of Commerce Industries and
Agriculture through the B. G. Deshmukh Award.

Images from the Mann School in Hinjewadi, Pune, funded by the CSR wing of Infosys’ Pune development center

38 | Social contract

Resource intensity

43.6% reduction in electricity intensity against the
baseline set in fiscal year 2008

34.5% reduction in water intensity against the baseline
set in fiscal year 2008

75.6 million units of electricity from renewable sources
in fiscal year 2014

10.1 MW of connected load reduction through HVAC
retrofits since fiscal year 2011

3.4 million sq. ft. of highest rated green buildings
2 MW of onsite solar power plants

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Rohan Parikh
Head – Green Initiatives and Infrastructure

Powering change through resource innovation
Our ability to push boundaries and take risks by incubating new
ideas has resulted in deserving rewards. Over the last six years, we
have been able to avoid the consumption of over 660 million units
of electricity. In absolute terms, even though our employee strength
in India has doubled, our total energy consumption went up by just
13% compared to fiscal year 2008. We have managed to reduce our
per capita electricity and fresh water consumption by about 44% and
35% respectively from our baseline figures of 2008.
10% of India's GDP is spent on hydrocarbon imports, which is a
large contributor to our carbon emissions and foreign account deficit.
At Infosys, we are committed to powering our entire electricity
requirement from renewable sources by 2018. We currently source
30% of our electricity from green power and have installed about
2  MW of solar photovoltaic (PV) plants in our campuses. Infosys
led the efforts of the Green Power Market Development Group and
worked with the regulators to bring about a favorable solar policy in
India. This new policy, coupled with the policy for 100% depreciation
in the first year from the finance ministry, has made the cost of solar
power competitive with the grid. We have decided to take leadership
and invest in 200 MW of solar plants by March 2018. Our investment,
along with the commitment of the green power market group
members, will bring in large investments and generate employment
in the renewable energy sector.
Our water conservation strategy encompasses rainwater harvesting,
use of water efficient fixtures in our buildings to reduce water
consumption, and the reuse of 100% of wastewater after treatment at
our campuses. To meet the fresh water requirements in some of our
campuses, especially during the summer, we have to rely on private
providers who source water from external borewells. However, the
reverse osmosis process that we use to treat water in some of our
campuses results in water wastage. Therefore there is an urgent need to
identify efficient and low-cost water treatment technologies. Currently
Infosys is exploring an alternative to reverse osmosis to reduce total
dissolved solids in water, and technologies to reduce hardness of water

40 | Resource intensity

without using chemicals. We are also experimenting with new low-cost
and low-energy wastewater treatment technologies. If we succeed in
incubating these ideas, these technologies can be replicated by the
industrial and residential sector and bring down the wastage of water
across the country.
Over the last few decades, the amount of waste generation has gone
up considerably, but as a country we have not focused on appropriate
segregation and solid waste management. As a result, most of the
generated waste finds its way to landfills. Last year, we spent
considerable time in evaluating different waste management strategies
to meet our goal of reducing the waste going to landfills. We have
achieved our goal of 100% waste segregation in most of our campuses.
We have significantly reduced mixed waste which is difficult to treat.
We have tied up with recyclers across all our campuses to take the
segregated waste and process it for further use. However, treatment of
some of the waste generated remains a challenge. Over the last year, we
have set up three different technologies for biogas treatment, we have
funded research on low-grade plastic treatment and found a solution
for managing the mercury from fluorescent tubes. We hope to share
our successful case studies in the public domain.
We are certified compliant to ISO 14001:2004 at most campuses
in India. Documented objectives and targets are established at the
corporate and development center levels and operational controls are
implemented for impact management, based on severity. We comply
with all applicable environmental regulations in countries where we
operate.
In summary, our key to success continues to be our ability to try and
test new ideas in our campuses. Almost every new building built over
the last six years is functioning as a live lab, where we are capturing
information about the performance of new technology and feeding it
back to the scientific community to accelerate their research. We will
continue on this path and we want other individuals and organizations
to join us in this journey to a greener future.

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

We focused on improving resource intensity through innovations in
resource conservation, strategic partnerships, setting tough goals and
improving performance and monitoring our resource footprint.

Innovation in resource conservation
Our sustainability strategy has innovation as one of its cornerstones,
and we continue to innovate consistently to create and redefine
benchmarks in corporate environmental sustainability. Our idea is to
prove that these innovations are financially viable and therefore can
be replicated by organizations and communities. Some of the most
important innovations that have helped us achieve significant resource
savings are as follows :

Connected load reduction through retrofits
Through continued deep green retrofits, we have reduced our
connected load further by 2.9 MW in fiscal year 2014. With this, we
have achieved a reduction in the total connected load by 10.1 MW
across our campuses in India, in the last three years. We have an
associated electricity savings of 174 million units. We have achieved
this through 35 retrofit projects and the payback period for most of
these projects has been less than three years.

Cumulative reduction in connected load (MW)

-2.9

-10.1

- 4.8

- 4.8

-7.2

-0.1

-0.1

-2.3

-0.1

-2.3

-0.1

-0.1

-2.3

-2.4

2011

2012

2013

2014

The power cables for street lights in our campuses run several
kilometers and consume significant energy. By using PLC technology
over the same cables, we will be able to monitor, control and maintain
street lights without using additional control cables.

Building efficiency
Most of our buildings built since 2008 have an Energy Performance
Index (EPI) below 100 kWh / sq. m. / year. This year, we were able to
achieve an EPI as low as 85 kWh / sq. m. / year in some of our new
buildings through good building designs and operations. This was
achieved through efficient building envelope, equipment, lighting,
heating and cooling systems, daylight utilization and by using other
innovative technologies. Monitoring our energy consumption at a
granular level has helped us eliminate wastage and optimize energy use.

Reducing heat island effect
The rooftops of all our owned buildings in India have been painted
white to reduce the heat island effect and also reduce the requirement
for air conditioning. A total roof area of 2.1 million sq. ft. has been
painted white in fiscal year 2014.

Research lab to test new materials and products
We are setting up a research lab to enhance our in-house research
capabilities. This will allow us to test new technologies and products
related to cooling, lighting, glazing, insulation, etc. It will also help us
to quickly compare alternatives and enable us to use the best available
technology.

First radiant panel based building in India
We have been a pioneer in the implementation of radiant cooling
technology in India. We were the first to implement radiant slab
cooling in a commercial building. Operational data over the last three
years have proven that radiant cooling reduces energy consumption by
30% compared to the conventional air conditioning system. This year,
we implemented the first radiant panel based cooling system in our
new office building in Bangalore. This is the next step in the radiant
cooling technology. In this system, pipes are embedded in panels of
modular sizes like ceiling tiles. This system has an added advantage
of flexibility, since panels can be easily fixed on the ceiling grid and
interconnected to allow for water flow. The radiant panel system may
be the solution for cases with specific ceiling designs and for retrofits
in existing buildings and helps achieve significant energy reduction.

Wireless, battery-less sensors for building automation
and lighting
We implemented the next generation of smart building technology in our
buildings. Sensors play a critical role in managing resource consumption
and comfort in buildings. Our smart buildings use sensing technology
that is not just wireless but also battery-less. This new technology works
on the principle of energy harvesting. The sensors and devices harvest
energy from the building's indoor environment. The following examples
illustrate the use of this technology :
•	 The light switch works on electromagnetic energy. Pressing the
switch generates enough energy to send a wireless signal for lights
to switch on / off.
•	 Occupancy sensors wirelessly communicate with lights and switches
for automation. The temperature and humidity sensors work on
harvesting light energy available inside the building. Four hours of
100 lux light is sufficient for the sensors to function for the next
24 hours.

Power Line Communication technology to operate
street lights
Power Line Communication (PLC) technology carries data on
a conductor that is also used simultaneously for electric power
distribution. We are exploring this technology to operate street lights
in our campuses, on a pilot-basis.

Radiant panel based cooling implementation, Bangalore campus

Green buildings
In fiscal year 2014, we were awarded the Leadership in Energy and
Environment Design (LEED) Platinum rating for five of our buildings
in Mysore, Mangalore, Pune and Hyderabad. We now have 10 LEED
Platinum-rated buildings and two buildings with GRIHA 5 star rating,
making a total of about 3.4 million sq. ft. of buildings with green
certification — the highest in India for office buildings.

Resource intensity | 41

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Through optimized building design and innovative use of technology,
we have been able to keep our capital investments of all our new green
buildings under control in spite of a huge increase in material and
labor costs over the last five years.

Reduction in per capita electricity consumption
We were able to reduce our per capita electricity consumption by
43.6% over the last six years. We have taken various initiatives to
reduce our energy consumption over the years. Some of our main
initiatives have been implementing radiant cooling, retrofits, using
building design with good insulation and correct orientation to reduce
heat ingress, harnessing efficient technologies and equipment, and
smart automation.

Smart water meters
In the Pune Phase-1 campus, 37 mechanical water meters have been
replaced with more accurate and reliable electromagnetic water
meters. These meters also have the capability to communicate with
our Building Management Systems (BMS), allowing us to monitor the
water consumption in real time. In addition, we have installed 105
smart meters at our Bangalore campus, which are capable of wirelessly
communicating with the central server.

Central Command Center
We have set up a Central Command Center to remotely monitor,
manage, and optimize our building operations. The center helps us
manage energy and other critical operations in our buildings and
campuses. We are now able to have building efficiency experts manage
operations, remotely provide technical expertise for all locations,
and analyze data to identify optimization opportunities. Centralized
expertise allows us to improve our diagnostic capabilities thereby
enhancing our operational effectiveness. This capability is not just
limited to diagnostics, but extends up to recommendations for new
building designs.

Solar PV plants
Between fiscal year 2012 and 2014, we have installed 2 MW solar PV
plants in our campuses. We plan to install another 200 MW of solar PV
plants in the coming years. This will help reduce our reliability on grid
electricity and help us progressively meet our overall goal to source
100% of electricity from renewable sources. The capacity of solar PV
plants installed in fiscal year 2014 are as follows :
Campus
Hyderabad
Chennai – Sholinganallur
Chennai – Mahindra City

Capacity (kW)
392
306
765

Electromagnetic smart water meter, Bangalore campus

Rainwater harvesting
In our Bangalore campus, 20 deep-well injection systems have been
built for groundwater recharge. These wells have a depth of 40–120 ft.
Some of our buildings with rooftop rainwater harvesting systems
collect and use rainwater for domestic purposes after the required
treatment. The rainwater harvesting infrastructure at our campuses
has been built to maximize sequestration.
During this fiscal year, we have constructed six deep-well injection
systems in Jaipur campus, one reservoir in Mysore campus
with a capacity of 40 million liters, and two reservoirs in our
Thiruvananthapuram campus with a total capacity of 8 million liters.
This will take the total number of lakes across our campuses in India
to 25. In our Chandigarh campus, 50% of the total roof area has been
connected to the rainwater harvesting system.

Water efficient fixtures
We have installed about 15,000 Pressure Compensating Aerators
(PCA) of 0.5 gpm flow rate in all water faucets across Pune, Bangalore,
Bhubaneswar, Mysore, Jaipur, Chandigarh, and Mangalore campuses.
PCAs are capable of providing constant flow of water through variable
pressure situations helping conserve water. In addition, waterless
urinals have been installed in the new building in our Bangalore
campus. We are planning to employ the same technology in all our
new buildings across India.

Rooftop solar PV installation, Chennai Mahindra City campus

Rooftop solar PV installation, Hyderabad Pocharam campus

42 | Resource intensity

Pressure compensating aerators

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Strategic partnerships

Environmental compliance

We are working with some of the best research institutes and
adopting best practices from across the world to implement the latest
technologies at our new and existing campuses.

We comply with all applicable environmental regulations in the
countries where we operate. Our resource-intensity efforts are driven
by aggressive targets beyond compliance benchmarks. There  have
been no instances of monetary or non-monetary sanctions for
non‑compliance and no environmental grievances reported to us in
our operations during fiscal year 2014.

We are working closely with the following organizations to further
research in building energy efficiency :
Indo-U.S. Joint Center for Building Energy Research and Development :
We are participating as an industry partner in the US-India Partnership
to Advance Clean Energy (PACE). This is a five-year project on clean
energy research and development in the areas of building efficiency.
We are working with several institutes and companies in India and
the U.S. to achieve energy savings by driving the development of
cost‑effective technologies in the areas of passive building design,
advanced HVAC and lighting technologies, building energy simulation,
automation, and monitoring.
Partnership with Saint-Gobain Research India  Limited : We have
partnered with Saint-Gobain for research on building materials,
analysis of building envelopes, and building monitoring systems to
improve the efficiency of buildings in hot or humid climates such as
in Hyderabad, Chennai and Thiruvananthapuram.
Partnership with United Technologies Research Center (UTRC) :
We are partnering with UTRC on technology evaluation of the energy
management system developed by them. The project intends to
demonstrate the energy savings made through building automation,
monitoring, analysis, and diagnostics, thereby optimizing energy use
and reducing operating costs.
Collaboration with the World Business Council for Sustainable
Development (WBCSD) on Energy Efficiency in Buildings (EEB) :
We hosted the WBCSD core group on EEB 2.0 in Hyderabad and
Bangalore in June 2013. The collaboration is aimed at sharing our
best practices in green buildings, energy management, and retrofits.
The sharing session provided us with an opportunity to engage with
other market players globally. The findings from this engagement would
inform the EEB 2.0 project strategy on engaging with decision‑makers
to analyze and overcome barriers for deep energy efficiency measures.
This is being documented for further use in communication and
outreach as a best-practice guide.

Water
Our fresh water consumption is solely for the purpose of human
sustenance. Hence, we believe that we do not significantly impact
water resources. We have however, continued our focus on reducing
our per capita fresh water consumption through various initiatives.
We were able to reduce our per capita fresh water consumption by
1.04% in fiscal year 2014, as compared to the previous fiscal at our
India locations. We have optimized our water consumption through
focused efforts over the last six years and we find that there is limited
scope for further reduction in consumption. Our water reduction goal
for fiscal year 2015 is 1%, compared to fiscal year 2014.
Our aim is to make our campuses water-sustainable. Water
sustainability strategy across our campuses includes reducing our
fresh water consumption, rainwater harvesting, and recycle and reuse
of wastewater. Our efforts to reduce fresh water consumption includes
and is not limited to installation of pressure reducing valves in taps
and pipes, the use of flow restrictors and installation of sensor taps in
high density areas.
The following table provides details of the sources of fresh water used
at our campuses in India in fiscal year 2014 :
Water sources
Municipal
Private providers
Ground water
Rain water
Total fresh water

(kl)
1,794,484
781,788
620,796
4,290
3,201,358

Note :	 None of the above water sources have been designated as protected or as
having high biodiversity value. We have not received any grievances from local
communities during fiscal 2014.

The trend of our monthly per capita fresh water consumption over the
years for all our India locations is as follows :

Fresh water consumption in kl

3.30

3.23

2008

2009

2010

2.17

2.15
167.24

2.53

3.01

3.28

(Per capita(1) per month )

2013

2014

Rohan Parikh with WBCSD – EEB 2.0 core group members, Hyderabad
Pocharam campus
Solid Waste Management (SWM) guide to best practices : We
hosted SWM expert Dr. Ing. Dirk Weichgrebe, University of
Hanover, Germany, for a three day conference and training on waste
management at our Bangalore campus. During this visit, the SWM
training was conducted for our facilities personnel. The last day of the
event focused on municipal scale waste management solutions and
had participants from local municipalities and several NGOs working
on solid waste management in the city.

2011

2012

Notes :	 The above data does not include water consumption at some leased facilities at
Gurgaon, Trill (Chennai), and CPC and Bagmane (Bangalore). The water in these
facilities is managed by the lessors.
(1)
	
	 Per capita consumption is computed by dividing the total fresh water consumption
in our locations by the total number of employees. Employee count is calculated by
totaling the swipe count of employees and number of support staff in our offices.
The employee count considered for fiscal year 2014 is 124,299 and covers all India
locations.

Resource intensity | 43

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

We have reduced our per capita fresh water consumption by 34.5%
as of fiscal year 2014 against the baseline figure of fiscal year 2008 at
our India locations. This has translated to an estimated avoided use of
4.67 billion liters of fresh water since fiscal year 2008. The following
graph captures our performance and its positive environmental
impact :

Estimated fresh water savings
5000
4462
3835

4000
3500

3121

3000
2500

4892

4774

2489

2000

3106

3396
3340

3531

Energy (within the organization)
Grid electricity (Non-renewable source)
Electricity from renewable source
Fuel (High speed diesel for Diesel Generators
(DG) + Boiler)
Total

in GJ
593,015
272,427
158,433
1,023,875

The direct energy consumed in overseas operations for electricity
(APAC region and locations with data centers) during fiscal year 2014
was 42,303 GJ.
The direct energy consumed outside our operations in various areas
during fiscal year 2014 for India locations is as follows :

3442
3156

3201

2489

Energy (outside the organization)
Fuel (LPG consumption at food courts)
Employee commute
Total

in GJ
56,138
424,740,398
424,796,536

1500

Electricity

1000

We have taken up an aggressive target to reduce our per capita
electricity consumption by 50% by fiscal year 2018, against our
baseline of fiscal year 2008. In fiscal year 2014, we have reduced
our per capita electricity consumption by 6.17%, over the last year
at our India locations. Overall, we have achieved 43.6% per capita
reduction in our electricity consumption against the baseline set in
fiscal year 2008.

2012

2013

2014

Estimated consumption of fresh water with
minimal efficiency measures
Actual fresh water consumption

Water consumption for APAC region has been estimated based on
the seating capacity at these locations and per capita per month water
consumption in India locations. The annual fresh water consumption
in for the APAC region is estimated at about 169,816 kl.

Wastewater treatment 
All the wastewater at our campuses is treated and reused for flushing,
landscaping, and in cooling towers. The use of treated water is also
optimized through dual-flush toilets, and sensor-based urinals.
Owing to stringent wastewater recycling and reuse systems, we have
not released any significant amount of untreated wastewater into the
municipal sewage systems during fiscal year 2014. The treated water
quality is monitored regularly to ensure our adherence to all applicable
environmental norms. The wastewater generated at some of our
satellite offices contributing to less than 1% of our overall wastewater
is released into the municipal sewage systems.

The electricity consumption for fiscal year 2014, broken up into grid
power, captive power, and green power, including an increased scope
resulting from the addition of new campuses and new buildings in
some of our existing campuses in India, is as follows :
Electricity
Grid (1)
Captive
Renewable (2)
Total

in kWh
164,726,324
13,694,269
75,674,220
254,094,813

	 This includes power from the grid and third party sources wheeled through the grid.
	 This includes green power wheeled through grid, and the units generated through
in‑house solar plants.

(1)
(2)

Electricity consumption in kWh
(Per capita(1) per month )

Energy
Our energy consumption takes place mainly through the use of
electricity, high-speed diesel used for generators and boilers, the
petrol / diesel used in company-owned vehicles, and lawn-mowers.
Based on our operations we consider the following four sources of
energy as relevant under upstream and downstream activities : LPG
(used in food courts), energy used for waste handling, employee
commute and business travel. We are reporting on employee commute
and LPG consumption based on data availability. The actual data
related to business travel and waste handling is not available and hence
these are not reported.

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

167.2

2011

178.3

2010

199.6

2009

229.5

2008

246.2

0

266.5

51

500

296.5

Fresh water (in million liters)

4500

The direct energy consumed in our operations in various areas in fiscal
year 2014 in our India locations is as follows :

2014

	 Per capita consumption is computed by dividing the total electricity consumption
in our locations by the total no of employees. The employee count is calculated by
totaling the swipe count of employees and number of support staff in our campuses /
offices. The employee count considered for fiscal year 2014 is 126,612 and covers all
India locations.

(1)

44 | Resource intensity

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Our reduction in the per capita electricity consumption has translated
to an estimated avoided use of 663 million units of electricity since
fiscal year 2008. The following graph shows our performance and the
avoided energy consumption.

Estimated electricity savings
500
406

400

Electricity (in million units)

450

437

450
350

350
288

300
250

225

200

225

259

Renewable energy
Our focus has always been on increasing our share of renewable energy.
We have achieved this by sourcing green power at a few locations,
harnessing solar energy onsite, for water heating and electricity
requirements. During fiscal year 2014, we used 75.6 million units of
green power, which is about 30% of overall electricity requirements
of our campuses in India. During the same period, 1,101 MWh of
electricity was produced from our solar PV systems in our campuses.

Emissions

300

249

improvements in retrofits. The reduction in the connected load frees
up the grid, and enables a better use of our power-generation capacity.

271

273

263

254

150

Our main emissions from our support activities include greenhouse
gases (GHG), SOx NOx and other Ozone Depleting Substances.
Emissions from the stacks connected to generators, boilers and diesel
operated fire hydrant pumps are monitored on a monthly basis.

GHG emissions

100

51

50
0
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

Estimated electricity consumption with
minimal efficiency measures
Actual electricity consumption

This year, we worked on defining our aspect boundaries based on the
impact. Since the data centers consume high energy, we have also
included all our locations with data centers. Further, based on the
number of employees stationed in APAC region, we consider that
electricity consumption in this region is important.
The electricity consumption data for APAC region and other overseas
locations with data centers is as follows :
Electricity through Grid
APAC
Americas
EMEA
Total

in kWh
7,481,504
2,649,176
1,620,122
11,750,802

Retrofits
We believe that our innovative approach to retrofit design will inspire
other HVAC designers to look at highly optimized designs, which
have payback periods of less than three years. This optimized design
will enhance the system efficiency by a minimum of 30%. The short
payback period in the projects demonstrates the viability of efficiency

This page covers GRI G4 General Standard Disclosure G4-22

In line with the GHG Protocol, we have categorized our GHG emissions
as direct and indirect based on the following criteria :
•	 Direct GHG emissions are emissions from sources that are owned
or controlled by the reporting entity.
•	 Indirect GHG emissions are emissions that are a consequence of
the activities of the reporting entity, but occur at sources owned or
controlled by another entity.
•	 The GHG Protocol further categorizes these direct and indirect
emissions into three broad scopes — scope 1, scope 2 and scope 3.
•	 We use ‘Operation Control’ as the consolidation approach for
emission calculation and reporting.
Source : http://www.ghgprotocol.org/standards/corporate-standard
Note : This section addresses the GRI G4-22 disclosure.

Our main sources of indirect GHG emissions include electricity
consumption, fuel consumption in food courts, business travel and
employee commute.

Restatements
We are restating emissions under scope 1 as follows :
Fuel : The density of diesel was considered 0.85 instead of 0.83, which
has been rectified and the N2O emission factor was considered as 0.006
and has been modified to 0.0006. As a result of this, we are restating
the figures for all years for fuel and mobile emissions. This has resulted
in an increase in the total GHG emissions under scope 1.
HFCs : R22 and R123 have been included under fugitive emissions
from hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) under scope 1 and the same has been
recomputed and restated from 2011-12 onwards, which has further
increased the total GHG emissions under scope 1.

Resource intensity | 45

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

The restated emission data for scope 1, scope 2, and scope 3 for the fiscal years 2008-2014 are as follows :
GHG emissions
(tCO2e)
Scope 1
Scope 2
Total – scope 1 + 2
Per capita (1) – scope 1 + 2
Year-on-year reduction of per
capita – scope 1 + 2
Scope 3
Business travel
Employee commute
LPG use in food courts
Waste
Total – scope 3 (2)
Total GHG emissions –
scope 1 + 2 + 3
Per capita (1) emissions

2014

2013

2012

2011

2010

2009

2008

23,910
137,744
161,654
1.28

33,623
134,232
167,855
1.37

22,788
158,311
181,099
1.59

18,985
182,135
201,120
2.04

24,189
171,373
195,562
2.32

20,275
183,292
203,567
2.52

12,142
167,268
179,410
2.84

6.65%

13.85%

22.29%

11.97%

7.82%

11.35%

–

178,240
63,446
3,545
39
245,270

128,386
53,087
3,635
36
185,144

118,055
41,653
3,681
38
163,427

114,715
34,172
(3)
NR
(3)
NR
148,887

73,800
31,727
(3)
NR
(3)
NR
105,527

5,900
30,960
(3)
NR
(3)
NR
36,860

3,665
24,764
(3)
NR
(3)
NR
28,429

406,924
3.21

352,999
2.88

344,526
3.02

350,007
3.56

301,089
3.57

240,427
2.97

207,839
3.29

	 Per capita emissions is calculated by dividing the gross GHG emissions by the total employee count across operations in India. The employee count considered for fiscal year 2014 is 126,612
which is calculated by totaling the swipe count of employees and number of support staff in our offices. The percentage reduction of per capita scope 1+2 for fiscal year 2014 against the
baseline year 2008 appears as 59.3% in our Annual Report. The number has undergone a change based on a comprehensive GHG verification carried out in May 2014 and it currently
stands at 55%.
(2)
	 Our total scope 3 emissions have increased by 32% over fiscal year 2013 due to the change in the DEFRA emission factors for air travel, which now includes the influence of radiative
forcing in air travel emissions. The CO2 emission factor has increased by 90% over the previous figure.
(3)
	 Not reported (NR). We started reporting our emissions from LPG and waste from fiscal year 2012.
(1)

The trend of monthly per capita GHG emissions (scope 1 and scope 2)
for all locations in India over the years is as follows :

Greenhouse gas emissions
(Per capita(1) tCO2e )

Emission reduction initiatives :
In line with our carbon neutral goal and our annual carbon intensity
reduction target, we have implemented the following emission
reduction initiatives. These have contributed to reducing our carbon
intensity (scope 1 and scope 2) by 6.65% in fiscal year 2014 compared
to fiscal year 2013 of our India operations.

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

1.28

1.37

1.59

2.04

2.32

2.52

2.84

Carbon reduction initiatives

2014

	 Per capita emissions is computed by dividing the gross GHG emissions (scope 1 + 2) in
our locations by the total number of employees. The employee count is calculated by
totaling the swipe count of employees and number of support staff in our offices. The
employee count considered for fiscal year 2014 is 126,612 and covers all India locations.

(1)

Starting this year, we are also reporting the scope 2 GHG emissions
from the electricity consumption in APAC region and locations with
data centers.
The following table provides the GHG emissions data for these regions :
Area
APAC
Americas
EMEA
Total

46 | Resource intensity

Energy efficiency retrofits in our
buildings (scope 2)
Green power procured through
the grid (scope 2)
Onsite solar power (scope 1)
Total emissions avoided

Electricity
procured /
saved (MWh)

Emissions
avoided
(tCO2e)

4,560

3,866

74,573
1,101

63,289
929
68,084

NOx and SOx emissions
The operation of diesel generator sets and boilers are the main sources
of Nitrogen Oxides (NOx and Sulphur Oxides (SOx) emissions at our
campuses. The Sulphur content in the fuel we use is 50 ppm (BS-IV at
Bangalore, Hyderabad and Chennai) and 350 ppm (BS-III for all other
locations). The stacks are monitored on a monthly basis to ensure that
the emissions are within the limits prescribed by the regional Pollution
Control Boards. Ambient air quality checks are also conducted on a
monthly basis. The SOx and NOx emissions are material to us from
a compliance perspective and they are monitored on a periodic basis.
The emissions for fiscal year 2014 are as follows :
Particulars
Total emissions (t)

SOx
9.95

NOx
18.07

tCO2e
5,490
1,384
786
7,660

This page covers GRI G4 General Standard Disclosure G4-22

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Ozone depleting substances (ODS)
Our operations warrant the use of refrigerants in our Heating, Ventilation, and Air conditioning (HVAC) systems. These include substances such
as R22, R12, R123A, R410A, R407C and R134A, each of which has a varied Ozone Depleting Potential (ODP). We have made a conscious effort
to switch over to refrigerants which have minimum ODP and Global Warming Potential (GWP). The following table provides details of our
usage of ODS for the fiscal years 2011-2014 :
ODS

R22
R12
R123
R407C
R410A
R134A
Total
Note :	

(1)

2014
Total ODS
consumption
in kg
3,365
–
400
624
351
3,147

CFC11
equivalent
185
–
8
(1)
–
(1)
–
(1)
–
193

2013
Total ODS
consumption
in kg
3,425
14
610
1,007
363
552

CFC11
equivalent
188
14
12
(1)
–
(1)
–
(1)
–
214

2012
Total ODS
consumption
in kg
2,409
–
182
750
258
1,087

CFC11
equivalent
133
–
4
(1)
–
(1)
–
(1)
–
137

2011
Total ODS
CFC11
consumption equivalent
in kg
2,253
124
1
1
240
5
(1)
243
–
(1)
245
–
(1)
464
–
130

The ODP of R407C, R410A, R134A is zero.

Data computational methods

GHG emissions

The following parameters and conventions have been used for
calculating data for emissions, fresh water and electricity consumption
in the report :

The GHG emissions are computed for the three scopes.

Employee count per capita per month
The information on employee numbers based on swipe count is
captured on a monthly basis for Infosys Limited and Infosys BPO
Limited, campus-wise. The average count is arrived at after excluding
weekends, holidays, and working days where the employee count is
less than 10% of the maximum count in a particular month. The count
of the contractual staff is added to this total and this count remains
more or less constant with a variation of +/- 5%. The count of visitors
is not included.
Total employee count = Average employee count
(Infosys Limited and Infosys BPO Limited) + count of contractual staff

SOx and NOx calculations
To arrive at the SOx and NOx emissions, the average emission rate,
running hours of diesel generators and boilers per month, and the
oxides of Sulphur and Nitrogen are first computed.
The exhaust stacks are monitored for the net emission calculation for
the following :
•	 Concentration of SOx and NOx emissions
•	 Flow rate of exhaust gases
•	 Running hours of diesel generators (DG) and boilers
The following formulae are used for the final computation :

Scope 1
Stationary combustion
The total monthly quantity of high speed diesel (fuel) combusted by
diesel generators and boilers is captured and used for the emission
computation. The emission factor for high speed diesel is sourced from
the IPCC 4th Assessment Report.
Mobile combustion
The total monthly quantity of diesel and petrol used by Companyowned vehicles and lawn mowers is considered. The emission factor
for diesel / petrol is sourced from the IPCC 4th Assessment Report.
Stationary combustion — Onsite – solar power generation
The total quantity of electricity generated in kWh at each site is sourced
from energy meters. The emissions due to onsite power generation from
renewable sources such as solar and wind is considered to be ‘zero’.
Fugitive emissions — Refrigerants used in AC equipment
HVAC systems are a basic requirement of our industry. Various
refrigerants are used for the air conditioners, each of which has a
different global warming potential. The total weight (in kg) of the
refrigerant refilled during the service of air conditioning systems is
captured from the service reports. This consolidated quantity based
on the different refrigerants is used for the GHG computation using
emission factors sourced from DEFRA.
Fugitive emissions – SF6 in electrical circuit breaks

NOx = (NOx X Emission rate / 1,000) X (Running hours of DG and
boilers)

Some of the electrical breakers installed in our campuses contain
SF6, which might be refilled during the course of maintenance. The
information on the quantity of SF6 used for refilling the electrical
breakers, if any, from the service report is collated and the total GHG
emissions computed using emission factors sourced from DEFRA.

Energy

Scope 2

Our Energy consumption within our operations includes electricity
from grid, fuel used in diesel generators and company owned vehicles
and equipment. The energy consumption outside the organization
consists of fuel used in personal and commercial vehicles used by our
employees for daily commute to our offices and business travel and
fuel used in our food courts. The energy data is calculated by using
suitable conversion factors for electricity and various fuel sources as
defined in the IPCC 4th Assessment Report.

This includes the emissions from the generation of purchased
electricity.

SOx = (SOx X Emission rate / 1,000) X (Running hours of DG and
boilers)

This page covers GRI G4 General Standard Disclosure G4-22

Purchased electricity consumption
A major portion of our electricity is sourced from government agencies
or other utility providers who provide invoices on a monthly basis.
This is used to capture information on the units consumed during the
month in a location, and this information is recorded on the dashboard.

Resource intensity | 47

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

To calculate the total scope 2 emissions, we have used the latest
emission factors for grid electricity provided by the Central Electricity
Authority for India and country specific emission factors provided by
DEFRA for overseas locations.

Emission
source
R-134A

Scope 3

R-22

Other indirect emissions include :

R-123

Business travel
Business travel comprises long and short distance air travel globally,
and commute through surface transportation including trains, buses,
cabs, etc., for business requirements. iTravel, an internal application,
provides an integrated, end-to-end web-based solution for the travel
needs of our employees. This solution is integrated with all Company
policies, business processes, rules and validations and it captures the
total distance travelled.
The emissions due to business travel is estimated based on the fuel
efficiency, the total distance travelled and the fuel characteristics
like Net Calorific Value (NCV), density and emission factor for the
fuel used.
Our total scope 3 emissions have increased by 32% over fiscal year
2013 due to the change in the DEFRA emission factors for air travel,
which now includes the influence of radiative forcing in air travel
emissions. The CO2 emission factor has increased by 90% over the
previous figure.
Employee commute
Employees commute to office and back by various means including
Company-provided transportation, personal vehicles and public
transport. The total number of two-wheeler and four-wheeler parking
slots available on our campuses is considered for personal transport
assuming it is occupied 100%. The data for carpooling is considered as
5% of the total four-wheeler parking slots. The information on the total
number of bus users is provided by the transport team, which covers
the number of people travelling by Company-provided transportation.
The difference between the total number of employees and the sum of
personal transport users and Company-provided transport users gives
the total number of users using public transport. This information is
used to compute GHG emissions.
During this year, the emissions due to employee commute has been
estimated based on the fuel efficiency, the total distance travelled and
the fuel characteristics like NCV, density and emission factor for the
fuel used, which has reduced the emissions.
LPG usage in food courts
LPG is used as a fuel in our food courts and the total consumption is
captured through invoices from the vendors, which is then used for
GHG computation using emission factors provided in the IPCC 4th
Assessment Report.

SF6
Diesel –
company
owned
vehicles
Petrol –
company
owned
vehicles
Scope 2
Electricity –
Southern Grid
(India)

Emission Unit
Reference
Factor
1300 kg CO2e / kg DEFRA 2013
Refrigerant & others
1810 kg CO2e / kg DEFRA 2013
Refrigerant & others
77 kg CO2e / kg DEFRA 2013
Refrigerant & others
22800 kg CO2e / kg IPCC 4th
Assessment report
74.1 tCO2e / TJ
IPCC 4th
Assessment report
69.3

tCO2e / TJ

IPCC 4th
Assessment report

0.85

tCO2e /
MWh

0.82

tCO2e /
MWh

CEA CO2 Baseline
Database for the
Indian Power Sector
- 2013
CEA CO2 Baseline
Database for the
Indian Power Sector
- 2013

Electricity –
Western, and
North-Eastern
regional grid
(India)
China

0.76647

Australia

0.84092

New Zealand

0.1502

Singapore

0.49945

Malaysia

0.72738

Japan

0.41641

U.S.

0.52225

U.K.

0.44548

Mauritius

0.63741

Scope 3
Waste
E waste

21

Paper waste

21

Metal waste

21

Emission Factors used for GHG calculations

Wood waste

21

The emission factors used for GHG calculations are as follows :

Plastic waste

21

Batteries

65

Waste
The emissions due to food waste, metal waste, wood waste and
e-waste are included for the emissions computation. The total Monthly
Quantity of Waste disposed (by type) for each facility is arrived at by
weighing the same, and this is used for the GHG computation.

Emission
Emission Unit
source
Factor
Scope 1
High Speed
74.1 tCO2e / TJ
Diesel (HSD)
Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS)
R-410A
1725 kg CO2e / kg
R-407c

48 | Resource intensity

1526

DEFRA 2013
Refrigerant & others
kg CO2e / kg DEFRA 2013
Refrigerant & others

DEFRA 2013
Overseas Electricity
DEFRA 2013
Overseas Electricity
DEFRA 2013
Overseas Electricity
DEFRA 2013
Overseas Electricity
DEFRA 2013
Overseas Electricity
DEFRA 2013
Overseas Electricity
DEFRA 2013
Overseas Electricity
DEFRA 2013
Overseas Electricity
DEFRA 2013
Overseas Electricity

DEFRA 2013 waste
disposal
DEFRA 2013 waste
disposal
DEFRA 2013 waste
disposal
DEFRA 2013 waste
disposal
DEFRA 2013 waste
disposal
DEFRA 2013 waste
disposal
IPCC 4th
Assessment report
IPCC 4th
Assessment report

LPG

63.1

kg CO2e /
tonne
kg CO2e /
tonne
kg CO2e /
tonne
kg CO2e /
tonne
kg CO2e /
tonne
kg CO2e /
tonne
tCO2e / TJ

Employee
commute
/ business
travel – diesel
vehicles

74.1

tCO2e / TJ

Reference

IPCC 4th
Assessment report

kg CO2 /
kWh
kg CO2 /
kWh
kg CO2 /
kWh
kg CO2 /
kWh
kg CO2 /
kWh
kg CO2 /
kWh
kg CO2 /
kWh
kg CO2 /
kWh
kg CO2 /
kWh

This page covers GRI G4 General Standard Disclosure G4-22

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Emission
source
Employee
commute –
petrol cabs
Business travel
– rail

Employee
commute /
business travel
– diesel Bus
Business travel
– air domestic
average
Business travel
– air long haul
international
economy class
average
Business travel
– air long haul
international
business class
average

Emission Unit
Factor
69.3 tCO2e / TJ
75

74.1

Reference
IPCC 4th
Assessment report

gCO2e / pkm Twelfth five year
plan (2012 /
2017) / Planning
Commission,
Government of
India. Volume II –
Table 15.1
tCO2e / TJ
IPCC 4th
Assessment report

0.326615

kg CO2e /
pkm

DEFRA 2013
Business travel Air

0.165362

kg CO2e /
pkm

DEFRA 2013
Business travel Air

kg CO2e /
pkm

DEFRA 2013
Business travel Air

0.479574

Waste management
We have been persistent in our efforts to ensure reuse, recycling,
and the responsible disposal of waste, and have a scientific approach
towards waste management. We provide products, consultancy and
services in the information technology domain. Hence, our operations
do not result in the release of any significant waste, and also do
not necessitate the use of any natural or recycled raw materials for
packaging goods and services. Our suppliers are encouraged to reuse
the packaging material used in the supply of goods to us.
The color-coding for waste segregation at our campuses is as follows :

Wet waste

Dry waste

Toxic waste

E-waste

Waste is segregated at source, stored and disposed to authorized
recyclers, in adherence to applicable legislations. Hazardous waste and
e-waste are disposed to recyclers, who possess the required clearances
from the Pollution Control Boards. We have biogas plants in our Mysore
and Mangalore campuses for handling food waste and an organic waste
converter in our campus in Thiruvananthapuram. Paper waste is sent
out for recycling in Bangalore and Mysore campuses. The  vendor
recycles the paper and provides recycled products in return.

The details of hazardous and non-hazardous waste disposed in the last three fiscal years are as follows :
Particulars
Hazardous waste
E-waste
Oil soaked cotton waste
Biomedical waste
Used oil
Batteries
DG batteries
DG filters
Paint can / containers
Chemical cans / containers
Non-hazardous waste
Food
Paper
Metal
Wood
Plastic
Glass
Thermocol

Unit

t
t
t
kl
t
Number
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t

2014

Total disposed quantity
2013

2012

118.54
0.77
20.31
34.00
78.22
–
1.56
3.06
10.07

86.90
0.38
16.43
33.00
(1)
7,700.00
36.00
(1)
934.00
(1)
4,731.00
(1)
6,332.00

128.78
0.27
14.52
36.00
(1)
49,334.00
889.00
(1)
852.00
(1)
782.00
(1)
7,081.00

3,241.52
663.30
575.82
133.79
119.29
4.19
0.62

3,405.00
792.00
453.00
316.00
82.00
(2)
NR
(2)
NR

2,154.00
1,107.00
390.00
100.00
88.00
(2)
NR
(2)
NR

Note : (1) Till fiscal year 2013, batteries, DG filters, Paint cans / containers and chemical cans / containers were reported in numbers. From this fiscal year, we are reporting these in tonnes.
(2)
	 Not reported (NR). We started reporting glass and thermocol waste from fiscal year 2014.

This page covers GRI G4 General Standard Disclosure G4-22

Resource intensity | 49

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Our initiatives on waste management are spread across three
dimensions, namely, influencing social behavior, process optimization
and the implementation of technology.

Influencing social behavior
Employee engagement and awareness programs are conducted across
all campuses through eco clubs, to sensitize employees on waste
management and achieve segregation at source. All the common areas
and pantries in the campuses have color-coded and labeled bins to
ensure segregation of waste. The following initiatives are in progress :
•	 To make segregation easier for employees, pantries and food courts
across all campuses will have a standardized green bin for wet waste
and blue bin for dry waste.
•	 Stickers with images to identify items that go into wet and dry waste
bins have been designed and are being printing for all campuses.
This will educate employees on waste segregation at source.

White-breasted Kingfisher, Mysore campus

•	 Mailers and posters have been created to strengthen awareness and
sensitize employees about waste reduction.

Process optimization
The waste generation patterns are continuously monitored in
our campuses and the process of waste management is modified
accordingly.
•	 We have initiated a detailed quantification of all kinds of waste to
analyze and reduce waste.
•	 We have taken a corporate decision to ban all single-use plastic and
paper tableware (cups, spoons, plates and stirrers) from food courts.
We have phased out disposable cutlery in most of our campuses,
and replaced them with steel and glass cutlery with cooperation
from our vendors. This helps in reducing the waste generated and
will also make segregation easier for employees.
•	 We have standardized the design of waste-storage yards to enable
better segregation and storage, and in turn enhance the recycle value
of waste.

Implementation of waste treatment technology
Last year, we implemented anaerobic digestion and composting
systems in five of our campuses in India.

Anaerobic digestion
We installed an Anaerobic Digestion plant in our Mangalore campus to
convert food waste into biogas, which is used for cooking in the food
courts. The technology is based on thermophilic dry digestion process
and the digesters operate at temperatures in the range of 50-55 degrees
Celsius. These plants are automated and the process parameters such
as pH, gas quantity generated, etc., can be remotely monitored on a
computer. Each tonne of food waste produces about 140 m3 of biogas
every day, which is equivalent to three commercial cylinders.

Peninsular Rock Agama, Bangalore campus
All of our existing campuses are situated on government-approved
land (industrial zones). None of our campuses fall within or are
adjacent to protected areas or high-biodiversity areas, as notified in the
siting guidelines issued by the Ministry of Environment and Forests,
Government of India. Environmental impact assessment studies are
conducted for all new projects, where applicable, which cover the
study of impacts related to air, water, social, biodiversity etc., within
a 10 km radius of the proposed project site.
Currently, our focus is on planting trees which are of ecological
importance. During the last fiscal year, we have planted about 102,190
saplings on our campuses.
The annual increment in the number of trees across our campuses over
the last six years is as follows :

Cumulative number of trees planted
(India campuses)

Composting

Considering the growing importance of biodiversity conservation, we
formulated a biodiversity policy. We are committed to conserving and
promoting biodiversity at all of our owned facilities, and we constantly
encourage our employees and our stakeholders to do the same. Many
of our campuses support a rich diversity of flora and fauna.
50 | Resource intensity

2009

141,700

Biodiversity

118,000

2010

2011

2012

288,065

226,000

We did not have any significant spills during fiscal year 2014.

180,000

390,255

We have installed composting facilities in our Bangalore, Jaipur and
Chandigarh campuses. Food waste along with garden waste is mixed
in equal proportions and is being composted by in-vessel composting
in Jaipur and Chandigarh and by using an organic waste converter
in the Bangalore campus. The compost generated is used as manure
in landscaping. Any excess garden waste is shredded and used for
mulching.

2013

2014

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Bio park at the Mangalore campus comprising rare and indigenous flora

Eco advocacy and good citizenry
Our employee-driven eco groups in our campuses provides a platform
for passionate employees to volunteer their time. The eco groups
take up projects that address the conservation of electricity and
water, recycling of waste and local afforestation. We recognize and
support the efforts of our employees through various forums like the
Infosys Awards for Excellence, where we have included a dedicated
category for Sustainability. Best projects undertaken by employees
are acknowledged and recognized through monetary reward and a
citation, which motivates them to continue to work for the betterment
of the environment.
The following are some of the highlights of our activities in fiscal
year 2014 :
•	 Clean Hussain Sagar drive – Employees from our Hyderabad
campus participated enthusiastically in an initiative on solid
waste management along with residents, schools and commercial
establishments around the Hussain Sagar lake. As part of the
campaign, they successfully installed composting bins in a couple

of temples and in the vegetable market to promote using the bins
for dumping bio-waste to generate manure.
•	 Free pollution checks – Our employees were offered free pollution
checks for two and four-wheelers by the eco clubs in Hyderabad and
Thiruvananthapuram to sensitize employees about the pollution
caused by their vehicles and to encourage them to get their vehicles
serviced regularly.
•	 Zero food waste initiative – This was an initiative to encourage
employees to reduce their food waste in some of our campuses. In
our Hyderabad campus, employees who did not waste food were
given prizes.
•	 Earth Hour – Around 80 employees from our Pune campus engaged
to conduct awareness campaigns in their residential societies to
participate in the Earth Hour campaign driven by the World
Wildlife Fund (WWF). They created awareness among the residents
to switch off lights for one hour and also spread the message of
energy conservation.

Resource intensity | 51

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Green power for a sustainable future
India is rich in solar energy across majority of its landscape. It is also one of the largest growing economies with huge energy demands. India's
annual Global Horizontal Irradiance (GHI) varies from 1,600 to 2,200 kWh/m2, which is twice as high when compared to Germany, which has
the highest solar power installations in the world with a total capacity of about 36 GW (Wirth, 2014). India currently has a total capacity of
2.6 GW (Chadha, 2014) and has a huge potential for growth in this area. It makes economic as well as environmental sense to invest in solar
energy installations to generate power in India to meet the growing energy demand.
Global horizontal irradiation

Germany

Average annual sum (4/2004 - 3/2010)
< 1100

1200

1300 > kWh/m2

0

50

100 km

© 2011 GeoModel Solar s.r.o.

Global horizontal irradiation

India

Average annual sum (2005 - 2010)
< 12500

1400

1550

1700

1850

0
2000

2150 > kWh/m2

100

200 km

© 2011 GeoModel Solar s.r.o.

Source : http://solargis.info
Acknowledgement : SolarGIS © 2014 GeoModel Solar
At Infosys, we have taken up the goal to source all our electricity
requirements from renewable sources, in the next four years.
We currently meet about 30% of our electricity needs from green
power. We have installed about 2 MW captive solar PV in our
campuses in India. We are also planning to add another 50 MW solar
PV installations in the next two years. This makes economic sense for
us not only because of the attractive solar policies but also due to the
fact that the cost of electricity and diesel has increased by 35% and
by 70% respectively across our India operations in the last five years.

Solar PV installation, Chennai Mahindra City campus

We have rooftop and on-ground PV installations across four campuses
in India :
Campus
Chennai
Thiruvananthapuram
Hyderabad
Jaipur
Total

Last year, we had to rely heavily on Diesel Generators (DG) to run
our operations at the two Chennai campuses due to the acute power
crisis in the region. The cost of DG power on an average is three times
higher than the grid power. We consumed about 7 million units of
electricity from DGs between March and December 2013. Hence, it
made economic sense to install large PV systems at these campuses.
The payback period for these PV installations has been estimated
to be about six years, which is very attractive, considering that the
operational lifetime of these solar plants is about 15 years.

Bibliography
Chadha, M. (2014, April 8). India's Solar Power Capacity Tops 2,600 MW. Retrieved from www.cleantechnica.com
Chadha, M. (2014, March 4). Welspun Energy Commissions India's & Asia's Largest Solar Power Project. Retrieved from www.cleantechnica.com
Wirth, D. H. (2014, April 10). Renewable Energy Data. Retrieved from Fraunhofer ISE : http://www.ise.fraunhofer.de/en

52 | Resource intensity

Plant capacity
in KW
1,189
127
400
253
1,961

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Smarter operations – Central Command Center
At Infosys, we use pioneering green technologies to address resource
conservation through an integrated design approach. Smart building
technology is the way to realize maximum benefits of integrated
designs through smarter operations.

effectiveness. This capability is not just limited to diagnostics but also
helps in making recommendations for new building designs.

Smart buildings use inbuilt artificial intelligence and energy saving
algorithms to constantly optimize operations on the go and build
high-level diagnostics. They offer maximum leverage on the variability
that exists with building operations, such as weather, occupancy, and
equipment condition. We use a combination of sensors, controllers,
actuators, feedback and energy saving intelligence to make building
operations most efficient. Using this technology, we have recently
set up a central command center at our Bangalore office to remotely
monitor, review, manage and optimize our building operations.
The command center has access in real time to all the smart buildings
in our campuses across the country. Building efficiency experts
with expertise in areas of HVAC (air-conditioning), lighting, plug
load energy and water continuously review building operations in
real-time as well as analyze historical data to identify improvement
opportunities. Unlike standard location-based setups, which may not
always have trained professionals overseeing the building operations,
our command center has expert engineers to monitor and analyze
data. Operational parameters such as design vs. actual performance,
equipment health, system key performance indicators and other
diagnostic parameters at the equipment and system level and historic
trends are reviewed. Energy and water wastage are also identified and
reviewed from the command center setup. Centralized expertise allows
us to smarten our diagnostic capability and hence enhance operational

Central Command Center, Bangalore campus
The command center can provide data for all our India campuses
and buildings to our internal stakeholders — from a facility manager
to senior management — aiding them to view details from one
location and also get current and past data on energy consumption,
equipment condition and operating patterns. Comparative analysis
can also be carried out easily between multiple buildings or campuses.
This changes the whole landscape of building operations.

Resource intensity | 53

This page is left blank intentionally

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Green innovation

95% improvement in enterprise storage performance
from Dynamic Storage Tier technology deployment
Partnered with COMMIT to develop wearable

computing technology

25% improvement in agent productivity for a telecom
client, deploying AssistEdge
Reduction in carbon footprint by optimizing the
customer asset management process
Collaborated with the Confederation of Indian Industry to
create volunteering portal for India@75, India’s first
national volunteering week
Developed a platform for a major U.S. electrical
utilities company to enable consumers to switch to
renewable energy

Green innovation | 55

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Prasad Joshi
Vice President, Infosys Labs

Innovations for sustainable business
In continuation of our endeavor towards green innovation, we have
aligned the objectives of sustainability and increased business value.
While focusing on innovation in products and technologies that
deliver value and sustainability to clients, we have also made it a part
of our internal processes and business models.
These include creating or using innovative technology, such as
the deployment of Dynamic Storage Tier technology in the face of
ever‑expanding requirements for storage capacity and performance.
With the motto of doing more for less, we were able to use this
technology to limit storage infrastructure and accompanying data
center power and cooling requirements while increasing capacity.
It helped improve the enterprise storage performance by 95%, with
cost savings and performance improvements to boot.
Recognizing the need for greater digitization and reduction of paper
usage in enterprises, we developed Infosys Electronic Signature
Solution (iESS) that enables easy and seamless integration of digital
signature support into enterprise approval workflows replacing
the need for manual signatures. This has enhanced security and
compliance and greatly reduced paper usage in our key government
and banking clients.
We combined technologies such as sensors, GSM and GPS to create
the TradeEdge Merchandizing and Audit Tools, a tracking system that
helps track the usage of coolers for food and beverage storage, even in
the remote locations of rural India. While this helps clients monitor
the effectiveness of their distribution network today, such solutions
have the potential to improve the effectiveness of food distribution in
general and also improve access to nutrition and healthcare in remote
regions.

56 | Green innovation

We revisited our model of handling client-loaned assets constituting
equipment to the tune of US $1.5 billion, which were traditionally
required to be shipped back at the end of the project. By advocating and
bringing in policy changes with the government, we institutionalized
internal processes and checks. We were able to drastically change the
utilization of such assets with benefits for all stakeholders involved.
We eliminated the cost of shipping back the assets, greatly improved
our ability to scale infrastructure, enhanced reconciliation of the
loaned assets for disposal as e-waste, and eliminated energy and fuel
expenditure in transportation.
We have chosen to invest in research in technologies oriented towards
innovation that help create a better society. Our investments in research
on Internet of Things (IoT), which we are undertaking together with
COMMIT, a public-private research community, have helped in
creating wearable computing technology. This can potentially be used
in areas such as assisted living, remote monitoring of the elderly, and
field safety of people working in hazardous environments.
We are making strides towards realizing our vision of leveraging
sustainable solutions for better business value. In fact, we felt the
need to align the objectives of sustainability and increased business
value in all our projects and initiatives. We are convinced that there
are opportunities for innovation and sustainable development across
the organization — innovations that not only leave a greener and
more socially-enriched environment, but also contribute to business
benefits and increased business effectiveness for ourselves and our
stakeholders.

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Harnessing green innovation
Green innovation provides a sustainable transformational opportunity
for our stakeholders and for us. It is an important area to differentiate
and co-create with our stakeholders to drive internal and external
innovations, capability building, and sustainable solutions.
A dedicated Green Initiatives team works on internal innovations,
while we gauge the socio-environmental impact of our services and
offerings and generate economic benefits for our clients.
We drive various initiatives and innovations towards sustainable
business which benefit both our clients and for us.

Sustainable asset management
We have numerous client-loaned assets, including over 70,000
equipment worth about US $1.5 billion. This accounts for high data
center space requirements, high power consumption, administrative
bandwidth and substantial maintenance and cooling costs, resulting
in a huge carbon footprint. On completion of the projects, a re-export
of these assets entails high transportation costs and / or real-estate
expenditure for our clients.
Operational issues like budget approvals, high procurement cycle
times that impact the project delivery and timely availability of
IT infrastructure, presence of legacy and heterogeneous systems
compound the challenges in managing these assets.
A four-pronged innovative approach was conceptualized to effectively
address these challenges.
Build innovation platform : A cost-effective, agile and robust
IT innovation platform was created leveraging technologies in
virtualization, optimization, storage and cloud-based technologies.
By leveraging these technologies, we were able to significantly reduce
the total cost of ownership and help achieve desired business agility
and reduce cycle time for our clients.
Optimized asset management : We focused on liaising with government
departments for advocating policy changes and coordinated with
internal units for better resource management. A cross-functional team
was instituted to track, monitor and review usage of loaned assets on a
periodic basis. This resulted in total energy savings of about 258,200
units, which in turn provided cost savings to the tune of US $393,458.
In addition, the program helped in optimum space utilization, thereby
saving close to US $14,11,490; with a potential annual saving of about
US $1,804,950.
E-waste Management : A lean process of Loaned Asset Reconciliation
and Optimization resulted in the successful release of unused assets
as e-waste, thus gaining forex credit of up to US $1.32 million.
The launch of an e-waste initiative helped reduce carbon footprint
and decrease operating expenses, in keeping with our commitment to
carbon neutrality by fiscal year 2018. Through this initiative, we were
able to release around 81 tonnes of client-loaned assets for e-waste,
reduce the carbon footprint by 2,421 tonnes and energy consumption
by 2,140 kW. The initiative created additional useful real estate and
energy savings of US $1.3 million. We were also able to streamline
processes with customs / Software Technology Parks of India (STPi)
on e-waste disposal for loaned equipment.
Server and storage virtualization : We institutionalized an innovative
methodology to transform physical IT infrastructure to green IT
infrastructure by leveraging virtualization and blade server technology.
This helped preempt substantial investment and energy savings as
well as a significant reduction in carbon footprint. The solution has
generated a cost saving of close to US $2 million and has a saving
potential of around US $400,000. We have hosted close to 168 virtual
machines, which has taken care of critical project requirements,
enabled research and development (R&D) projects and provided the
infrastructure for training.

The initiative resulted in the following improvements :
•	 Critical projects : Over 78 virtual machines have been provisioned
to meet critical requirements and have helped projects that were at
high risk to meet deadlines for client deliverables.
•	 Research initiatives : Over 32 virtual machines have been provisioned
so far to meet various research and development initiatives.
•	 Academy and training needs : We provided close to 58 virtual
machines for conducting various training programs.
From an environmental perspective, the initiative has resulted in about
4,748 tonnes of carbon footprint reduction, which is equivalent to
planting 15,690 trees.

Information Systems : Digitization and virtualization
Our Enterprise Platform Management team, which is a part of the
Information Systems Unit, is responsible for managing infrastructure
that runs the digital business engine of Infosys. Hosted in multiple data
centers, our infrastructure and platforms comprise more than 1000
physical and virtual servers, more than a petabyte of storage, about 70
million files, state of the art platforms and solutions including – Blade
servers, Rack mount servers, Interconnect hardware, NAS, Content
Platform, Tape Libraries, load balancers, SAN Fabric / Switches,
Network Switches, Virtualization platforms, Operating systems,
Database Servers, Package solutions, middle tier, presentation layers,
WAN optimization solutions, data protection layers and many more.
It also includes Infosys' corporate data which comprises client data,
project data and information pertaining to our employees and other
stakeholders.
Our increasing business and global employee base put additional
pressure on storage requirements as well as on performance and
scalability capabilities, which demanded a radical paradigm change
in the Storage Area Network (SAN).
SAN had addressed the capacity-related requirement through
high‑capacity drives, but the performance of the traditional hard disk
drives (SATA, SAS and FC) had scope for improvement.
The performance of the compute platform improved with
latest‑generation multi-socket multi-core servers, but there were
still some challenges as the storage had performance bottlenecks for
enterprise data centers due to the adoption of server virtualization.
The addition of Solid State Disks (SSD) helped address the performance
issues, but the high cost of the drives posed challenges to the Total
Cost of Ownership (TCO) as it required continuous operational
expenditure (OPEX) investments.
With a sustainable solution and our ‘do more with less’ philosophy,
we innovatively conceptualized and deployed Dynamic Storage Tiers
using the state-of-the-art Flash Accelerator to meet the performance
and TCO requirements along with high-capacity, low-cost storage.
The storage performance improved by up to 95% and we achieved a
cost reduction of up to 65%, in comparison with the Flash Accelerator,
with the deployment of the new solution.
Traditional storage design : Our multiple data centers — each
containing a SAR (storage area network) — are interconnected
through a dark fiber link. The production systems are configured using
failover cluster design with nodes of the clusters distributed across
data centers to facilitate high availability and data center level disaster
recovery. Storage was allocated using thin provisioning technology
from traditional SAS-based disk pools.
With the traditional storage design, we were able to optimally utilize
the storage space and reclaim unused storage. But the following
limitations caused business challenges :
•	 Incremental data storage requirements coupled with the addition
of a low-capacity SAS disk had become a challenge to manage, due
to limited data centers, power and cooling availability. With the

Green innovation | 57

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

ever‑increasing data growth, adding increasingly low capacity, the
SAS disk was becoming a challenge owing to the limited availability
of the data center, power and cooling.
•	 Certain critical databases required less storage space while
demanding extremely high IO requirements, hence designing the
storage pool for such requirements with the SAS disk was resulting
in unusable disk capacity to a great extent.
Our solution was an innovatively-designed and deployed Dynamic
Storage Tier using the Flash Accelerator.
The usage of 143 GB SAS disk pools as a conventional storage design
were rendering the drives obsolete. Adding high-capacity drives would
have resulted in lot of unused capacity, while replacement of these
disks with a Solid State disk was an expensive proposition.
Storage-based tools were used to analyze the usage pattern for a
substantial duration and various load patterns. Ninety percent of the
storage blocks had not been accessed for a long time. The solution
comprised placing frequently-used storage blocks in high-performance
storage. However, moving these blocks manually based on the business
cycle would result in administrative overheads.
We evaluated Dynamic Storage Tier technology, which has the
capability to monitor the storage usage pattern and move the blocks
to different storage tier within same storage pool.
The Flash Accelerator is a high-capacity disk with a storage capacity of
up to 1.6 terabytes that delivers up to 40,000 Input-Output operation
Per Second (IOPS) on a single disk.

We deployed the solution using a combination of the following :
•	 Dynamic Tiers to monitor and move the storage blocks to a different
storage tier (Automated monitoring and data movement)
•	 Flash Accelerator to store frequently-used storage blocks
(High‑performance storage tier)
•	 143 GB 15K RPM disk drives for less frequently-used storage blocks
(Medium-performance storage tier)
•	 900 GB 10K RPM disk drives for least frequently-used storage block
(High-capacity lower-performance storage tier)
This solution has been instrumental in institutionalizing an
economically as well ecologically sustainable model that will not only
reduce the TCO and carbon footprint, but also help in keeping pace
with increased performance requirements.
This implementation has helped us realize one-time savings (net of
investments) of US $382,600, cost reduction per GB (in comparison
with Flash Accelerator) of 65% and cost reduction per IOPS
(in comparison with the traditional pool) by 40%.
We have observed significant performance improvements, with the
average response time for package solution workloads improving by
90%, and by 50% for other workloads.
The implementation has also been instrumental in improving
employee productivity through significant reduction in time spent on
troubleshooting performance issues and storage migration initiatives. 

Power requirements

450

18,000

400

16,000

350

14,000

Power requirements (Watt)

300
250

gn

esi

200

al

150

n
itio

d
ge

ora

st

d

Tra

n

sig

e
ed

10,000
8,000

rag

sto

io

dit

Tra

6,000

l
na

4,000

Capacity growth (GB)

Operational and green efficiency through digitization
One of the key challenges faced by enterprises is the need for manual
approvals (signatures) that are mandatory to meet government
regulations. This severely impacts the organization from multiple
perspectives : delays due to the need for manual intervention and
increased operational costs due to physical paper management. It is
assumed that about 60% of the paper usage in enterprises is towards
maintaining physically-signed papers as per regulatory needs.
Electronic signatures play a pivotal role in addressing these challenges
by replacing handwritten signatures and help building efficient,
faster, economical, and sustainable digitized business processes.

58 | Green innovation

1,00,000

90,000

80,000

70,000

60,000

50,000

0

e design

Sustainable storag
20,000

1,00,000

90,000

80,000

2,000

40,000

design

70,000

50,000

40,000

30,000

20,000

10,000

Sustainab

60,000

le storage

50

30,000

100

0

12,000

10,000

Number of drives

Data center space requirements

Capacity growth (GB)

The Infosys Electronic Signature Solution (iESS) is a platform, and
browser-agnostic technology that helps in seamless integration of
digital signature support into enterprise approval workflows replacing
the need for manual signatures. iESS uses industry standard-strong
cryptography techniques. iESS also has built-in data integrity check
and enhanced security and regulatory compliance.
This solution has had multiple deployments within government
offices and large global banking domains. We see a high potential for
iESS in government, retail, healthcare, insurance, banking and other
industry segments, to help them in their journey towards digitization
and paperless offices.

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Collaborating for a social cause
We played a crucial role as a technology platform provider in
collaborating with the Confederation of Indian Industries (CII),
for an initiative under India's First National Volunteering Week.
The  India@75 volunteering program was initiated across India by
engaging people from all walks of life. The program focused on
volunteering efforts in the following areas :
•	 Education and skills
•	 Technology and innovation
•	 Agriculture and food security
•	 Business and economy
•	 Urbanization and environmental sustainability
•	 Arts, literature and sports
•	 Moral leadership, governance and public administration
We helped CII develop a portal to allow volunteers to register and
provide their support for volunteering. The portal offered options to
call for volunteers in specific areas. It created a platform for engaging
and enabling volunteers to share stories and bring about an impact
in the society. India@75 was successful in reaching out to 7,100
organizations, including 1.6 million Business Management students
and 35 million professionals in the organized sector. The  portal
also acted as a database for capturing information about various
volunteering programs that have been carried out across the country.
We continue to collaborate with CII to enhance the portal, pro‑bono,
to enable skilled volunteering for the corporate sector. This portal will
eventually evolve as a National Volunteering Grid for the entire nation.

Improving performance through Green Data
Centers
We are working with one of the largest natural gas and electric utilities
companies in the world for Data Center Modernization (DCM) to
improve disaster recovery capabilities of the company. We are
helping the client in migration of business-critical applications and
shared services to two new data centers that are currently located at
zones having high risk of earthquakes, floods and security breaches.
The program aims to help the clients perform the following functions :
•	 Provide industry-standard infrastructure along with robust Disaster
Recovery (DR)
•	 Build foundational infrastructure services and migrate
business‑critical applications to the systems of the new data center
•	 Provide state-of-the art data center facilities to generate significant
enterprise-wide safety, reliability and risk mitigation benefits
•	 Improved environmental efficiency reducing the client's carbon
footprint through energy-efficient data centers and migrating
applications to energy-efficient platforms
The new data center helps the client provide better customer service,
including delivering reliable power with less-frequent outages for its
customers. Furthermore, it helps ensure safety through advanced
recovery capabilities in case of natural calamities.
These business benefits are under-pinned by the following capabilities
delivered by the program :
•	 Improve disaster recovery capabilities through uninterrupted access
to the client's most critical business processes, and faster recovery
time for other critical business applications. Improved performance
on key Disaster Recovery metrics by 80% Recovery Point Objective
(RPO) and Recovery Time Objective (RTO)
•	 Curtail costs by lowering hardware and licensing costs through
reduced server count, reduced logistics cost through technology
standardization, and lower administration overheads on routine
activities such as environment setup and follow-up
•	 Improved responsiveness, performance and governance through
reduced project / non-production environment build time by
60%, ensuring faster time-to-market, improved performance of

the production systems and batch jobs by up to 50% and setting
up a transparent support governance structure and optimized
operational processes for efficient and low-cost IT services.
•	 Through this engagement, the client was able to realize their Green
Data Center vision of improved environmental efficiency and
reducing their carbon footprint.

Green data center

Using technology for renewable energy
adoption
We are playing a crucial role in the Net Energy Metering (NEM)
program, for one of the largest electric utilities companies in the U.S.
The company has state-driven compliance requirements related to
demand side management and focus on renewable energy generation,
especially solar energy. The NEM program is designed to benefit
the company's consumers who generate their own electricity using
specific renewable technologies. Under this program, consumers who
produced more energy through renewable energy than consumed from
the grid, receive a credit for the surplus electricity exported to the grid.
The objectives of the program included an automated tracking system
to track the net generation, compute credits under the credit rewards
scheme and reduce manual efforts in billing and communication.
Besides improving operational efficiencies through automation, we
were able to help the client implement the following programs :
•	 Summer discount program
•	 Summer advantage initiative / critical peak pricing
•	 Peak time rebate
•	 Multifamily affordable solar housing
•	 Virtual net metering
One such program, the summer discount program, for example,
helped optimize resource utilization, wherein the utility company
could switch off the air conditioner(s) remotely through radio signal
during peak period. Customers could enroll in this program through
the client website, which was enabled by Infosys.
These programs helped improve consumer engagement through
transparency in reporting, communication and education on
optimization.

Increasing operational efficiency for water utilities client
We are working with a water utilities company to help design and
deploy an integrated operational management system, to allow better
planning and predictability for its day-to-day operations management.
Locating and mining information is key to achieving the strategic goals
set by the company towards customer satisfaction, in addition to its
aim in achieving a record of no pollution, no incidents, no waste and
no accidents.
We intend to help the client integrate their existing data warehouse
with a new forecasting and modelling system, to enable business to
Green innovation | 59

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

take informed decisions on their operations based on real-time data
about personnel, their skill sets, availability and current work.
Through the project, we will help the client reduce the reactive
operating cost, in addition to reducing failures related to compliance
and water quality. The project also helps improve the water utilization,
avoiding water leakages and contamination of the water supplied and
thereby associated health-related impacts for its consumers.

Managing the impact of changing temperatures
Changing temperatures around the world have led to extreme summers
and winters in some countries. The scorching heat of the summers,
especially in tropical areas, pose a major problem to the food and
beverage sector. For example, chocolates require to be stored at an
optimum temperature range of 18-20 degrees Celsius. In most tropical
countries, like India, maintenance of this optimum temperature by the
unorganized retail sector can pose a challenge. There are about seven
to eight million retail outlets, with average retail sale per store at a few
thousand rupees, and affording coolers / refrigerators is not a viable
option. In spite of the companies providing refrigerators for free, it
is difficult to monitor and track the effective usage of the coolers by
the retailers.
Brands and large retailers spend a lot of money on in-store promotional
programs to generate demand for their products in an ultra-competitive
market. Monitoring such spend and ensuring promotions are properly
executed is an everyday challenge for brands. While in-store visual
merchandising audits are conducted by brands and retailers, labor
costs associated with this are high and the sample-space of stores (in
which such manual audits are conducted) is small. Delay in getting
field data limits the brand's ability to take necessary and timely market
corrections.
Infosys TradeEdge Merchandising and Audit Tools bring a unique set of
tools and services that deliver highly differentiated insights to brands,
so they can better manage promotional and merchandising spend.

Using Internet of Things : Wearable computing
We are investing on research on Internet of Things (IoT), along with
COMMIT, a public-private research community. It aims to address the
grand challenges in information and communication science shaping
tomorrow's society. The current work focuses on improving the health
of the sports community (including amateurs) by understanding
behavioral change and compliance data. Additionally, it works towards
improving the personal motivation of individuals, using behavioral
intervention technology which is based on modern ICT, especially
smartphones, off‑the‑shelf sensors and cloud.
Unlike the existing sports coaching application, the project combines
three aspects of health : physical, mental and social, and their
interactions. The project aims to provide real-time feedback to
users while they are exercising, using a smartphone, thus providing
a complete sense-model-action loop. It not only helps to provide
personalized feedback based on individual goals, but also exploits
aggregated information from groups of users to enhance the feedback.
The project will deliver scientific results in the detection of patterns
in exercise and health as well as providing intelligent motivational
support. Though the research currently focuses on improving the
health of the sports community, we envisage that the potential from
this area can be applied over various important facets of well‑being
including :
•	 Assisted living for the elderly and remote monitoring
•	 Continuous monitoring of health and safety of field personnel
working in hazardous and remote environment like mines and
chemical plants
•	 Regular monitoring of blood chemistry and vital signs of
post‑operative and high-risk patients
•	 Emotion monitoring through stress level monitoring and Facial
Expression, Awareness, Compassion, Emotions (FACE)

One of its modules is Asset Quality Tracking, which has :

Assisted living

•	 Sensor-based trackers to monitor product ambience that includes
the temperature and humidity of product cooler units periodically

 Elderly care
 Remote monitoring

•	 Location-sensor technology (e.g., GPS) to track the location of
product cooler units and ensure that they are kept in the store
We were able to help one of the leading companies in the food
and beverage sector with an enterprise application dashboard with
ambience information pertaining to all cooler units, email / SMS
alerts (including power-off, incorrect location and incorrect ambience
alerts). This enabled the client to understand the utilization of the
coolers across the retailers, focus on understanding the issues and
work towards better usage. We were able to help the client address the
potential risk of product returns, in addition to avoiding chocolates
being sold in an undesired state and / or causing health hazard for its
consumers which could potentially deter the brand image.

Are your temperature-sensitive products
stored the right way?
So your product is meant to be stored
under certain temperature conditions.
And you’ve given retailers product coolers
to make sure they do so. But the coolers could
get misplaced. And retailers may be turning up or
turning down the temperature a few degrees.
The result : consumer dissatisfaction and
costly product returns.

WHAT IF

your coolers were at the right place, at the
right temperature – always?

60 | Green innovation

Health and fitness
 Measure, analyze and act (self-tracking)
 Personalized coaching

Field personnel monitoring
 Continuous monitoring of health and safety
of field personnel working in hazardous
environments like mines and chemical plants

Patient monitoring
 Regular monitoring of blood chemistry and
vital signs of post-operative and high-risk
patients

Emotion monitoring
 Stress level monitoring
 FACE (Facial expression, awareness,
compassion, emotions)

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Customer experience modernization
Infosys AssistEdge is a unique innovative suite designed to help clients provide end-to-end modernization of the customer service experience.
Surveys have shown that narrating the same problem to multiple service agents on the same or on different channels is one of the biggest sources
of customer frustration. This also leads to companies and their service agents spending a large part of their work time attending to repeat calls
from irate customers.
Infosys AssistEdge is the first customer service product for contact centers that delivers an integrated cross-channel experience, covering web, chat,
phone and social media, thereby transforming contact centers from issue resolution centers to revenue-generating units. The platform provides
a unique context-passing capability and self-help technology — provided on an intuitive dashboard thereby enhancing the agent productivity
by 25% while delivering a superior customer experience.
We enable organizations to realize faster return on investment through improved agent efficiency, reduced call volumes, and quicker go-live
periods. Enterprises have been able to break even on their investments in three months while tripling their returns in their first year.

Infosys AssistEdge Smart User Environment
Sign-in Manager
• Enables Single Sign-on for multiple disparate
applications used by the agent

integrating and presenting them on a single user
interface
• Displays all customer and case-related information on
a single panel

Process Automation

Notesmaker
• A handy and customizable feature to
prepare call summary and notes to insert as
part of closure comments
• Enables agents to wrap up the call or key in
closing comments in no time

Smart User
Environment

• Extracts data relevant for the business needs
• Aggregates, correlates and performs necessary
automation to cater to the requirements of the
business processes

Data Analytics and Reporting
leverage compatible Business Process Management
execution with one step at a time using the
automations exposed as Service Operations

Widening the reach of cooperative banks in India
The Short Term Cooperative Credit Structure (STCCS) in India plays
an important role in widening the reach of institutional credit both
from a geographic and socio-economic perspective. The extensive
branch network with reach in remote areas makes them an important
channel for achieving greater financial inclusion. The STCCS, in a
majority of Indian states, has three tiers, comprising State Cooperative
Banks (SCBs) at the apex level, Central Cooperative Banks (CCBs) at
the intermediate level and Primary Agriculture Credit Societies (PACS)
at the village level.
As part of a larger mandate to develop the agriculture and rural
sector, there was a need to bring the SCBs and CCBs to a common
technology platform to make the credit delivery system faster and
easier as also to incubate financial inclusion initiatives. The larger
intention was to facilitate the use of optimal technology in rural
financial sector to propagate the financial inclusion process faster than
the currently‑existing trend.
Finacle®, our core banking solution, along with a leading systems
integrator, was chosen as the appropriate technology solution for 104
SCBs and CCBs having a branch network of 3,595. Our objective was
to lay down the entire technology platform under the Application
Service Provision (ASP) model to enable the participating SCBs and
CCBs across India, to conduct their banking and financial inclusion
business seamlessly in an integrated environment.

• Consolidated reporting platform which is a one stop
shop for all reporting needs of a customer service
organization
• Provides analytical reports to improve agent
productivity and makes every customer interaction
more effective

Within a span of 20 months, 104 banks with over 3,583 branches and
20,000 users are live with Finacle®. It mainly provides capabilities
in the following lines of business : Core banking (deposits, savings
and investment and loans, credit and lending), internet banking and
mobile banking, ATM / POS, customer information, non-banking
financial products, and transactions and payments processing.
The project has provided the following advantages to these banks :
•	 Greater scalability : Starting from a relatively low transactional
volume in the initial stages, the banks have been equipped to cater
to significant increases in transactional volumes because of a system
roll-out and greater participation of rural citizens in the banking
process.
•	 Enabling new business models : The technology adoption endeavor
has presented a critical change in the focus of the banks to becoming
a customer-centric organization and the most secured vehicle for
credit dispensation to the larger mass of the financially-excluded
population.
•	 New lines and new channels : The banks are able to seamlessly
establish new lines of business such as integrated lending,
investment advisory, insurance, deposit garnering, livelihood
financing, and main delivery vehicle for government-sponsored
poverty alleviation, developmental schemes, as well as to establish
new channels for the distribution of products and services to
customers.

Green innovation | 61

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

•	 Business efficiencies : The banks in their new technological avatar
are highly positioned to demonstrate improved operational
effectiveness and efficiency, resource management, and performance
management. The other benefits include the following :
–– The banks are enabled to offer a wider and more flexible product
portfolio and improved customer service
–– Enhanced availability of Management Information System (MIS)
for more effective management control and monitoring
–– Compliance with regulatory requirements in operations and
reporting
–– Facilitation of faster, cheaper and efficient financial inclusion
Technology plays a crucial role in taking companies as well as their
clients towards their sustainability goals. Our solutions are helping
banks reposition themselves to become the principal vehicles for
the advancement of financial inclusion of the unbanked population.
Equipped with flexibility and analytical capability along the technology
landscape, financial institutions can now add value to their sustainable
practices. Our solutions supported their vision and strategy and
helped the banks deploy these systems within a short period, and
integrate and derive operational efficiencies from it. It also helped
in significant re-engineering of their business processes including
training and enhancing the skills of their employees. The solution
helped millions of people from rural and agricultural backgrounds
by providing financial instruments. Today, financial inclusion,
propagation of government-sponsored programs and participation of
the rural population in the mainstream banking activities has become
a reality and has led to sustainable development.

62 | Green innovation

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Goals and summary
Strategic goals
We monitor progress on our stated goals at regular intervals. The implementation status of our strategic sustainability goals and our immediate
future plans are as follows :
Focus area

Goals 2013-14

Status 2013-14

Goals 2014-15

Frameworks to integrate our
business and sustainability goals.

•	 Integrate sustainability
parameters with our business
excellence model – the
Infosys Scaling Outstanding
Performance (iSOP)
framework.

•	 We have integrated
sustainability parameters
with our business excellence
model – iSOP.

•	 We will strengthen the rollout
of the responsible supply
chain policy.

•	 We have included climate
change in our Enterprise
Risk Management (ERM)
framework.

•	 We will strengthen the rollout
of our responsible citizenship
program leveraging the
volunteering spirit of
Infoscions.

•	 We have included
environmental goals in our
corporate scorecard.

•	 We will implement the CSR
policy.

•	 We have drawn up our CSR
policy and constituted the
Board Committee for CSR.

Operational goals
The progress and status of our stated goals are as follows :
Focus area

Goals 2013-14

Status 2013-14

Goals 2014-15

•	 We will reduce our per
capita carbon intensity by
5% over our fiscal year
2013 levels.

•	 In fiscal year 2014 (scope 1 and 2), we were
able to reduce our carbon intensity by 6.65%
for India locations.

•	 We will reduce our carbon
intensity for scope 1 and 2, by
2% over fiscal year 2014 levels.

Environment
Carbon

•	 This year, our boundary for reporting includes
APAC and other global data centers. We were
able to reduce our carbon intensity (scope 1
and 2) by 7.7% including these new regions.
•	 Our overall scope 3 emissions have increased
by 32% over fiscal year 2013 due to the
increase in business travel and changes in the
Department for Environment, Food and Rural
Affairs (DEFRA) 2013 emission factors for
air travel, which now includes the influence
of ‘radiative forcing’ in air travel emissions.
The inclusion of radiative forcing has increased
the CO2 emission factor by 90% as against the
emission factor in DEFRA 2012.

Electricity
consumption

•	 We will reduce our
per capita electricity
consumption by 5%
over our fiscal year 2013
levels.

•	 In fiscal year 2014, we have reduced our per
capita electricity consumption by 6.17% over
fiscal year 2013 levels.

•	 We will reduce our per capita
electricity consumption by 2%
over fiscal year 2014 levels.

Renewable energy

•	 We will increase the share
of our renewable energy
in our total electricity
consumption, by 5% over
fiscal year 2013 levels.

•	 We have increased our renewable energy share
by 8% over the last fiscal year. This increases
our share of renewable energy in our total
electricity consumption to 30% till date.

•	 We will increase the share of
renewable energy in our total
electricity consumption by 2%
over fiscal year 2014 levels.
•	 We will invest in 40 MW of solar
PV plants.

This page covers GRI G4 General Standard Disclosure G4-22

Summary | 63

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Focus area

Goals 2013-14

Status 2013-14

Goals 2014-15

Water
consumption

•	 We will reduce our
per capita freshwater
consumption by 5%
over our fiscal year 2013
levels.

•	 We have reduced our per capita freshwater
consumption by 1.04% during the year.
•	 We have optimized our freshwater
consumption through focused efforts over the
last six years and we find that there is limited
scope for further reduction. Hence, we have
revised our water goals.

•	 We will reduce our per capita
freshwater consumption by 1%
over our fiscal year 2014 levels

•	 We will embark
on ground water
sequestration to conserve
more fresh water than we
consume in fiscal year
2014 through rigorous
rainwater harvesting
strategies.

•	 During this fiscal year, we have constructed
six deep well injection systems at our Jaipur
campus, one reservoir at our Mysore campus
with a capacity of 40 million liters, and two
reservoirs in Thiruvananthapuram campus
with a total capacity of 8 million liters. As of
fiscal year 2014, the total capacity of all our
reservoirs across campuses is about 250
million liters.

•	 We will implement
comprehensive rainwater
harvesting strategies in all our
new buildings
•	 We will establish a scientific
methodology to calculate the
rainwater recharged at our
campuses.

•	 100% of the wastewater
will be recycled and
reused on our campuses.

•	 100% of the wastewater generated in our
owned campuses are being recycled and reused
within our campuses.

•	 We will strengthen the process
of monitoring and measuring
wastewater generated, recycled
and reused in our campuses.

•	 We will ensure the
segregation of waste
at source at all of our
campuses.

•	 We have standardized our infrastructure and
processes to ensure segregation of waste at
source in all our campuses.

•	 We will ensure 100% of our
waste is segregated at source.

•	 25% of organic waste will
be treated onsite through
composting or at biogas
plants.

•	 Infrastructure has been set up to treat about
27% of organic waste onsite.

•	 50% of food waste will be
treated onsite, through biogas
plants / composting.
•	 50% of our garden waste will be
treated onsite by composting or
mulching

•	 Our focus will be on
minimizing waste going
to landfills.

•	 53% of paper cups and 89% of paper plates
used in food courts have been replaced with
reusable alternatives minimizing waste going
to landfill.

•	 Substitute 100% of identified
disposables used in food courts
with eco-friendly alternatives.

•	 We will follow the Green
Rating for Integrated
Habitat Assessment
(GRIHA) standards
for construction waste
management at all our
construction sites.

•	 GRIHA standards of construction waste
management are being implemented at all
our sites. Construction waste management
guidelines has been created and the status
against the guideline is reviewed through
weekly reports.

•	 We will review the adequacy of
waste disposal practices at all
our construction sites and ensure
that alternate environmentally
sound disposal methods are
identified as required.

•	 We will grow 100,000
saplings on our
campuses, which are
native to each region in
fiscal year 2014.

•	 In fiscal year 2014, we have planted about
102,190 saplings.

•	 We will grow 25,000 saplings
on our campuses in fiscal year
2015.

•	 We will strengthen
our supply chain
processes to capture
sustainability‑related
information.

•	 We have strengthened our responsible supply
chain processes and launched the Supplier
Code of Conduct.

•	 We will establish a
process to audit our
critical suppliers on an
ongoing basis.

•	 We have established a process to audit our
critical suppliers.

Solid waste
recycling

Biodiversity

Suppliers
Supply chain

64 | Summary

•	 Audit 25% of our critical
suppliers on responsible supply
chain practices.

This page covers GRI G4 General Standard Disclosure G4-22

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Focus area

Goals 2013-14

Status 2013-14

Goals 2014-15

•	 We will train 1,000
faculty members and
25,000 students of
partner CC engineering
colleges through Campus
Connect (CC) program.

•	 We have trained 1,476 faculty and 43,282
students from engineering colleges at the end
of fiscal year 2014.

•	 We will train 1,000 faculty and
25,000 students from partner
CC engineering colleges.

•	 We will co-create and
co‑teach industry
electives by collaborating
with around 40
autonomous institutions.

•	 Our industry electives are being offered by 121
institutes and 68 institutes participated in our
co-teach sessions.

•	 We will co-teach industry
electives along with 40
autonomous institutions.

•	 Through the Infosys
Prize, we will identify
and reward six of the best
researchers and scientists,
and establish them as role
models to inspire the next
generation of researchers
in the country.

•	 Through the Infosys Prize, we have identified
and rewarded seven researchers and scientists.

•	 Through the Infosys Prize, we
will reward six researchers and
scientists.

Society
Education

Employees
Sustainable
engagement

•	 We will roll out
•	 We have rolled out InFluence, our volunteer
InFluence, our volunteer
framework.
framework, integrating
our volunteering effort
with social leadership
competency development.

This page covers GRI G4 General Standard Disclosure G4-22

•	 We will roll out the Infosys
volunteering tool.
•	 We will continue to strengthen
employee engagement in
building social leadership
competencies.

Summary | 65

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Independent assurance statement
Introduction

Independent Assurance Statement

DNV GL represented by DNV Business Assurance India Private Limited has been commissioned by the management of Infosys Limited (‘Infosys’ or ‘the Company’) to carry out
an independent assurance engagement on the Company’s Sustainability Report 2013-14 (‘the Report’) in its printed and web format, and the referenced information in the
Report to the Company’s website and Annual Report 2013-14. The engagement was carried out based on the DNV GL Protocol for Verification of Sustainability Reporting
(‘VeriSustain’ - www.dnv.com/moreondnv/cr/; available on request) and focused on verification of non-financial - qualitative and quantitative information (sustainability
performance) disclosed in the Report including the underlying management systems and reporting processes.
The intended users of this assurance statement are the management of the Company and readers of the Report. The management of the Company is responsible for all
information provided in the Report as well as the processes for collecting, analyzing and reporting the information presented in the printed and web based report, including the
maintenance and integrity of the website. Our responsibility in performing this work is regarding the verification of the non-financial - qualitative and quantitative information
(sustainability performance) disclosed in the Report only and in accordance with the scope of work agreed with the management of the Company. The assurance engagement is
based on the assumption that the data and information provided to us is complete, sufficient and authentic. We disclaim any liability or responsibility to a third party for decisions,
whether investment or otherwise, based on this assurance statement. Our assurance engagement was planned and carried out in April – June 2014.

Scope, Boundary and Limitations of Assurance

The scope of assurance included the review of Economic, Environmental and Social disclosures in the Report. In particular, the assurance engagement included:
 Review the Report against the requirement of VeriSustain with moderate level of assurance;
 The verification of the qualitative and quantitative information on sustainability performance disclosed in the Report prepared by Infosys based on Global Reporting
Initiative G4 Sustainability Reporting Guidelines (GRI G4), and covering economic, environmental and social performance for the activities undertaken by the
Company over the reporting period 1st April 2013 to 31st March 2014 and disclosed in this Report;
 Review of the policies, initiatives, practices and performance described in the non-financial - qualitative and quantitative information (sustainability performance)
reported and referenced in the Report;
 Evaluation of the disclosed information in the Report, both General and Specific standard disclosures, ‘in accordance – Comprehensive’ reporting requirements
covering the systems, and the processes which Infosys has in place for adherence to the reporting principles set out in GRI G4;
 Confirmation of sustainability disclosures related to GRI G4 - ‘in accordance – Comprehensive’ as declared by Infosys.
The reporting aspect boundary is based on the internal and external materiality assessment predominantly covering Infosys’ Indian operations, including the key supply chain
activities as set out in the report. During the assurance process, we did not come across limitations to the scope of the agreed assurance engagement, except few disclosures
related to remuneration which are set out in the report as sensitive and confidential. No external stakeholders were interviewed as part of this assurance engagement.

Verification Methodology

This assurance engagement was planned and carried out in accordance with VeriSustain. The Report has been evaluated against the principles of Materiality, Stakeholder
Inclusiveness, Completeness, Responsiveness, Reliability and Neutrality. As part of verification, we visited Infosys’ head office in Bangalore and Development Centers located in
India i.e. Bangalore (Electronic City), Hyderabad, Pune (Phase I & II) and Trivandrum (SEZ). During the assurance engagement, we adopted a risk-based approach, i.e. we
concentrated our verification efforts on the issues of high material relevance to Infosys’ business and its key stakeholders.
As part of the engagement, we have verified the statements and claims made in the Report and assessed the robustness of the underlying data management system,
information flow and controls. In doing so, we have:
Reviewed the company’s approach to stakeholder engagement and its materiality determination process;
Verified the robustness of the data management system, information flow and controls;
Conducted in-person and on-line interviews with top and senior management team of Infosys and other representatives, including data owners and decision-makers
from different functions and locations of the Company;
Performed sample-based reviews of the mechanisms for implementing the Company’s sustainability related policies, as described in the Report.






Conclusions

In our opinion, based on the scope of this assurance engagement, the non-financial - qualitative and quantitative information (sustainability performance) reported, including the
referenced information provides a fair representation of the sustainability related strategies, management systems and performance. The Report meets the general content and
quality requirements of GRI G4 i.e.,


General Standard Disclosures: We reviewed the General Standard Disclosures reported in this Report and we are of the opinion that the reported information



Specific Standard Disclosures: We reviewed the Specific Standard Disclosures reported in this Report and we are of the opinion that the reported information

generally meets the reporting requirements for ‘in accordance – Comprehensive’ and the reasons for certain non-disclosures are explained with reference to
omission criteria.
generally meets the disclosure requirements for ‘in accordance – Comprehensive’ covering Generic Disclosures on Management Approach (DMA) and Performance
Indicators for identified material Aspects as below:
Economic

Economic Performance – G4-EC1 to 4;
Environment

Energy – G4-EN3 to 6;

Water – G4-EN8 &10;

Emissions – G4-EN15 to 21;

Effluents and Waste – G4-EN22 to 24;

Compliance – G4-EN29;

Environnemental Grievance Mechanisms – G4-EN34;

66 | Independent assurance statement

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Social
Labour Practices and Decent Work
 Employment – G4-LA1 to 3;
 Occupational Health and Safety – G4-LA5 to 8;
 Training and Education – G4-LA9 to 11;
 Supplier Assessment for Labour Practices – G4-LA14 & 15;
 Labour Practices and Grievance Mechanisms – G4-LA16;
Human Rights
 Investment – G4-HR1&2;
 Non-discrimination – G4-HR3;
 Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining – G4-HR4;
 Assessment – G4-HR9;
 Supplier Human Rights Assessment – G4-HR10 & 11;
 Human Rights Grievance Mechanisms – G4-HR12;
Society
 Anti-corruption – G4-SO3 to 5;
 Compliance – G4-SO8;
Product Responsibility
 Product and Service Labeling – G4-PR5;
 Marketing Communications – G4-PR7;
 Customer Privacy – G4-PR8;
 Compliance – G4-PR9.
We have evaluated the Report’s adherence to the following principles of VeriSustain on a scale of ‘Good’, ‘Acceptable’ and ‘Needs Improvement’:

Stakeholder Inclusiveness: The stakeholder identification and engagement process includes engagement with key stakeholders of business verticals to identify key

sustainability challenges and concerns through different channels. The material issues emerging from the stakeholder engagement were collected and prioritized, and the
results are fairly reflected in the Report. In our view, the level at which the Report adheres to this principle is ‘Good’.
Materiality: The Company has carried out the materiality assessment based on requirements of GRI G4. Inputs to materiality determination consider the aspects that are
internally and externally material to the organization and concerns of stakeholders. In our view, the level at which the Report adheres to this principle is ‘Good’.
Responsiveness: We consider that the response to key stakeholder concerns through its policies, management systems and governance mechanisms are fairly reflected in
the Report. In our view, the level at which the Report adheres to this principle is ‘Good’.
Completeness: The Report has fairly reported the General and Specific Standard Disclosures including the management approach, monitoring systems and sustainability
performances indicators against GRI G4 requirements corresponding to ‘in accordance – Comprehensive’. However few disclosures/performance indicators - internal and
external to the Company for geo-locations beyond Indian operations - are partially reported/responded. The Company has confirmed that the systems for aggregating data for
these disclosures are being developed. In our view, the level at which the Report adheres to this principle is ‘Acceptable’.
Reliability: The majority of data and information verified at head office and sites were found to be accurate. Some of the data inaccuracies identified during the verification
process were found to be attributable to transcription, interpretation and aggregation errors and these errors have been corrected. Hence, in accordance with the moderate level
assurance engagement, we conclude that the specified sustainability data and information presented in the Report are generally reliable. In our view, the level at which the
Report adheres to this principle is ‘Good’.
Neutrality: The disclosures related to sustainability issues and performances are reported in a neutral tone, in terms of content and presentation. In our view, the level at which
the Report adheres to this principle is ‘Good’.

Opportunities for Improvement

The following is a summary of observations and further opportunities for improvement reported back to the management of Infosys and are not considered for drawing our
conclusion on the Report; however, they are indeed consistent with the management’s objectives already in place:
 The stakeholder engagement process may be further strengthened based on multi-stakeholder engagement mechanism; consolidate key stakeholder concerns
across geo-locations of Infosys’ operations, and disclose key risks and its financial implications.

A system for periodic communication of sustainability performance may be evolved to disclose key sustainability performance disclosures in the Company’s website
for the benefit of stakeholders.

A comprehensive supply chain risk assessment covering the value chain partners will help in evolving appropriate sustainability strategies to manage risks.

Our Competence and Independence

We are a global provider of sustainability services, with qualified environmental and social assurance specialists working in over 100 countries. While we did conduct other third
party assessment work with Infosys in 2013-14, in our judgement this does not compromise the independence or impartiality of our assurance engagement or associated
findings, conclusions and recommendations.We were not involved in the preparation of any statements or data included in the Report except for this assurance statement. DNV
GL maintains complete impartiality toward internal stakeholders interviewed during the verification process.

For DNV GL

Vadakepatth Nandkumar
Project Manager,
Head – Sustainability and Climate Change,
DNV Business Assurance India Private Limited, India.
4th June 2014, Bangalore, India.

Prasun Kundu
Assurance Reviewer,
DNV Business Assurance India Private Limited, India.

Independent assurance statement | 67

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index
Our integrated Annual Report 2013-14, which includes our financial disclosures, the Business Responsibility Report, the Additional Information on our financial disclosures, and our Sustainability
Report, is available on our website, http://www.infosys.com/investors/reports-filings/Pages/index.aspx. Our Sustainability Report is aligned with the GRI G4 sustainability reporting guidelines.

GRI materiality check

The following table provides the mapping of our disclosures for fiscal year 2014 against the G4 framework requirements :

General standard disclosures
General
Standard
Disclosures

Disclosure
Page Number (or Link)
requirements Information related to Standard
Disclosures required by
the ‘in accordance’ options
may already be included in
other reports prepared by
the organization. In these
circumstances, the organization
may elect to add a specific
reference to where the relevant
information can be found.

Identified Omission(s)

Reason(s) for Omission(s)

Explanation for Omission(s)

External Assurance

In exceptional cases, if it is
not possible to disclose certain
required information, identify
the information that has been
omitted.

In exceptional cases, if it is
not possible to disclose certain
required information, provide
the reason for omission.

In exceptional cases, if it
is not possible to disclose
certain required information,
explain the reasons why the
information has been omitted.

Indicate if the Standard
Disclosure has been externally
assured.
If yes, include the page
reference for the External
Assurance Statement in the
report.

Strategy and analysis
General
Disclosure requirements
Standard
Disclosures
G4-1
Provide a statement from the most senior decision-maker of the
organization (such as CEO, chair, or equivalent senior position)
about the relevance of sustainability to the organization and the
organization's strategy for addressing sustainability.
G4-2
Provide a description of key impacts, risks, and opportunities.
Legend :

AR : Annual Report 2013-14

SR : Sustainability Report 2013-14

68 | GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index

Page Number (or Link)

Identified
Omission(s)

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

External
Assurance

Annual Report (AR) : Introductory
section;
Letter to the stakeholder : Pages 2-3

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

AR : Pages 36-41

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Organizational profile
Disclosure requirements
General
Standard
Disclosures
G4-3
Report the name of the organization.

G4-4

G4-5

G4-6

G4-7
G4-8
G4-9

G4-10

Legend :

Page Number (or Link)

Identified
Omission(s)

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

External
Assurance

AR : Shareholder information : Page 101

–

–

–

Infosys corporate website – About us :
http://www.infosys.com/about/Pages/index.
aspx
Infosys corporate website – Contact :
Report the location of the organization's headquarters.
http://www.infosys.com/contact/Pages/
country.aspx?subsidiary=Infosys&source=c
ontact&country=India
Report the number of countries where the organization operates, AR : Global presence : Pages 130-134
and names of countries where either the organization has
significant operations or that are specifically relevant to the
sustainability topics covered in the report.
Report the nature of ownership and legal form.
AR : Shareholder information : Page 101

–

–

–

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Report the markets served (including geographic breakdown,
sectors served, and types of customers and beneficiaries).
Report the scale of the organization, including :
•	 Total number of employees
•	 Total number of operations
•	 Net sales (for private sector organizations) or net revenues
(for public sector organizations)
•	 Total capitalization broken down in terms of debt and equity
(for private sector organizations)
•	 Quantity of products or services provided
a.	Report the total number of employees by employment
contract and gender.
b.	Report the total number of permanent employees by
employment type and gender.
c.	Report the total workforce by employees and supervised
workers and by gender.
d.	Report the total workforce by region and gender.
e.	Report whether a substantial portion of the organization's
work is performed by workers who are legally recognized
as self-employed, or by individuals other than employees or
supervised workers, including employees and supervised
employees of contractors.
f.	 Report any significant variations in employment numbers
(such as seasonal variations in employment in the tourism or
agricultural industries).

AR : Segment reporting : Pages 64-65

–

–

–

AR : The year at a glance : Pages 4-6,
8-10, Global presence : Pages 130-134,
Segment reporting : Pages 64-65

–

–

–

Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67

Sustainability Report (SR) – Social
contract – Talent management : Page 20

–

–

–

Report the primary brands, products, and services.

AR : Annual Report 2013-14

Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67

Pages
66-67

SR : Sustainability Report 2013-14

GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index | 69

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Organizational profile (contd.)
Disclosure requirements
General
Standard
Disclosures
G4-11
Report the percentage of total employees covered by collective
bargaining agreements.
G4-12
Describe the organization's supply chain.

G4-13

G4-14

G4-15

G4-16

Legend :

Page Number (or Link)

SR : Sustainability Report 2013-14

70 | GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

External
Assurance

AR : Page 110

–

–

–

SR – Responsible supply chain :
Pages 29-30
AR : Introductory section : Pages 1-2,
Letter to the stakeholder : Pages 2-3,
Directors' report : Pages 8-9

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

Report any significant changes during the reporting period
regarding the organization's size, structure, ownership, or its
supply chain, including :
•	 Changes in the location of, or changes in, operations,
including facility openings, closings, and expansions
•	 Changes in the share capital structure and other capital
formation, maintenance, and alteration operations (for private
sector organizations)
•	 Changes in the location of suppliers, the structure of the
supply chain, or in relationships with suppliers, including
selection and termination
Report whether and how the precautionary approach or
AR : Introductory section : Page 3,
principle is addressed by the organization.
Letter to the stakeholder : Pages 2-3,
Directors' report : Pages 16-17
List externally developed economic, environmental and social
AR : Pages 120-121
charters, principles, or other initiatives to which the organization
subscribes or which it endorses.
List memberships of associations (such as industry associations) AR : Pages 120-121
and national or international advocacy organizations in which
the organization :
•	 Holds a position on the governance body
•	 Participates in projects or committees
•	 Provides substantive funding beyond routine membership
dues
•	 Views membership as strategic
AR : Annual Report 2013-14

Identified
Omission(s)

Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Identified material aspects and boundaries
Disclosure requirements
General
Standard
Disclosures
G4-17
a.	List all entities included in the organization's consolidated
financial statements or equivalent documents.
b.	Report whether any entity included in the organization's
consolidated financial statements or equivalent documents is
not covered by the report.
G4-18
a.	Explain the process for defining the report content and the
Aspect Boundaries.
b.	Explain how the organization has implemented the Reporting
Principles for Defining Report Content.
G4-19
List all the material Aspects identified in the process for defining
report content.

G4-20

G4-21

G4-22
G4-23
Legend :

Page Number (or Link)

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

External
Assurance

AR : Consolidated financial statements :
Page 84,
Directors' report : Pages 8, 131-134,
SR : Aspect boundary : Page 9

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

SR : Materiality and stakeholder
inclusivity, Aspect boundary :
Pages 8-11

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

–

–

–

Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67

SR : Materiality and stakeholder
inclusivity, Aspect boundary :
Pages 8, 10-11
For each material Aspect, report the Aspect Boundary within the SR : Materiality and stakeholder
organization, as follows :
inclusivity, Aspect boundary : Pages 8-9
•	 Report whether the Aspect is material within the organization
•	 If the Aspect is not material for all entities within the
organization (as described in G4-17), select one of the following
two approaches and report either :
–– The list of entities or groups of entities included in G4-17
for which the Aspect is not material or
–– The list of entities or groups of entities included in G4-17
for which the Aspects is material
•	 Report any specific limitation regarding the Aspect Boundary
within the organization
SR : Materiality and stakeholder
For each material Aspect, report the Aspect Boundary outside
inclusivity, Aspect boundary : Page 9
the organization, as follows :
•	 Report whether the Aspect is material outside of the organization
•	 If the Aspect is material outside of the organization, identify the
entities, groups of entities or elements for which the Aspect is
material. In addition, describe the geographical location where
the Aspect is material for the entities identified
•	 Report any specific limitation regarding the Aspect Boundary
outside the organization
Report the effect of any restatements of information provided in SR : Summary and goals : Pages 63-65,
previous reports, and the reasons for such restatements.
Emissions : Pages 45-49
Report significant changes from previous reporting periods in
SR : Materiality and stakeholder
the Scope and Aspect Boundaries.
inclusivity, Aspect boundary : Page 9

AR : Annual Report 2013-14

Identified
Omission(s)

SR : Sustainability Report 2013-14

GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index | 71

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Stakeholder engagement
Disclosure requirements
General
Page Number (or Link)
Standard
Disclosures
Provide a list of stakeholder groups engaged by the organization. SR : Materiality and stakeholder
G4-24
inclusivity : Page 8, AR : Pages 114-116
Report the basis for identification and selection of stakeholders SR : Materiality and stakeholder
G4-25
with whom to engage.
inclusivity : Page 8, AR : Pages 114-116
Report the organization's approach to stakeholder engagement, SR : Materiality and stakeholder
G4-26
including frequency of engagement by type and by stakeholder inclusivity : Page 8, AR : Pages 114-116
group, and an indication of whether any of the engagement was
undertaken specifically as part of the report preparation process.
Report key topics and concerns that have been raised through
G4-27
AR : Pages 114-116, Introductory
stakeholder engagement, and how the organization has
section : Pages 3, 4, 6,
responded to those key topics and concerns, including through SR : Our commitment to social
its reporting. Report the stakeholder groups that raised each of
contract : Page 14, Materiality and
the key topics and concerns.
stakeholder inclusivity, Aspect
boundary : Pages 8, 9

Identified
Omission(s)

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

External
Assurance
Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67

Pages
66-67

Report profile
Disclosure requirements
General
Standard
Disclosures
G4-28
Reporting period (such as fiscal or calendar year) for information
provided.
G4-29
Date of most recent previous report (if any).
G4-30
Reporting cycle (such as annual, biennial).
G4-31
Provide the contact point for questions regarding the report or
its contents.
G4-32
a.	Report the ‘in accordance’ option the organization has chosen.
b.	Report the GRI Content Index for the chosen option.
c.	Report the reference to the External Assurance Report, if the
report has been externally assured. GRI recommends the
use of external assurance but it is not a requirement to be ‘in
accordance’ with the Guidelines.
Legend :

AR : Annual Report 2013-14

SR : Sustainability Report 2013-14

72 | GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index

Page Number (or Link)

Identified
Omission(s)

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

Reporting period : Fiscal year 2014

–

–

–

Fiscal year 2013

–

–

–

Annual

–

–

–

SR : Page 89

–

–

–

SR : About the report : Page 4

–

–

–

External
Assurance
Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Report profile (contd.)
Disclosure requirements
General
Standard
Disclosures
G4-33
a.	Report the organization's policy and current practice with
regard to seeking external assurance for the report.
b.	If not included in the assurance report accompanying the
sustainability report, report the scope and basis of any
external assurance provided.
c.	Report the relationship between the organization and the
assurance providers.
d.	Report whether the highest governance body or senior
executives are involved in seeking assurance for the
organization's sustainability report.

Page Number (or Link)

SR : About the report : Page 4

Identified
Omission(s)
–

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)
–

Explanation for
Omission(s)
–

External
Assurance
Pages
66-67

Governance
Disclosure requirements
General
Standard
Disclosures
G4-34
Report the governance structure of the organization, including
committees of the highest governance body. Identify any
committees responsible for decision-making on economic,
environmental and social impacts.
G4-35
Report the process for delegating authority for economic,
environmental and social topics from the highest governance
body to senior executives and other employees.
G4-36
Report whether the organization has appointed an
executive‑level position or positions with responsibility for
economic, environmental and social topics, and whether post
holders report directly to the highest governance body.
G4-37
Report processes for consultation between stakeholders and the
highest governance body on economic, environmental and social
topics. If consultation is delegated, describe to whom and any
feedback processes to the highest governance body.
G4-38
Report the composition of the highest governance body and its
committees by :
•	 Executive or non-executive
•	 Independence
•	 Tenure on the governance body
•	 Number of each individual's other significant positions and
commitments, and the nature of the commitments
•	 Gender
•	 Membership of under-represented social groups
•	 Competencies relating to economic, environmental and social
impacts
•	 Stakeholder representation
Legend :

AR : Annual Report 2013-14

Page Number (or Link)

Identified
Omission(s)

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

External
Assurance

AR : Board and committees : Infosys
Limited, Corporate Governance report :
Pages 12, 94, SR : Page 19

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

AR : Corporate governance report :
Pages 93-97, SR : Statement from the
Executive Vice Chairman : Page 6
AR : Corporate governance report :
Pages 93-97

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

AR : Corporate governance report :
Pages 97-99, 114-116, SR : Materiality
and stakeholder inclusivity : Page 8

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

AR : Board and committees : Pages 7-8,
Corporate governance report :
Pages 90-92

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

SR : Sustainability Report 2013-14

GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index | 73

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Governance (contd.)
Disclosure requirements
General
Standard
Disclosures
G4-39
Report whether the Chair of the highest governance body
is also an executive officer (and, if so, his or her function
within the organization's management and the reasons for this
arrangement).
G4-40
Report the nomination and selection processes for the highest
governance body and its committees, and the criteria used for
nominating and selecting highest governance body members,
including :
•	 Whether and how diversity is considered
•	 Whether and how independence is considered
•	 Whether and how expertise and experience relating to economic,
environmental and social topics are considered
•	 Whether and how stakeholders (including shareholders) are
involved
G4-41
Report processes for the highest governance body to ensure
conflicts of interest are avoided and managed. Report whether
conflicts of interest are disclosed to stakeholders, including, as a
minimum :
•	 Cross-board membership
•	 Cross-shareholding with suppliers and other stakeholders
•	 Existence of controlling shareholder
•	 Related party disclosures
G4-42
Report the highest governance body's and senior executives'
roles in the development, approval, and updating of the
organization's purpose, value or mission statements, strategies,
policies, and goals related to economic, environmental and
social impacts.
G4-43
Report the measures taken to develop and enhance the
highest governance body's collective knowledge of economic,
environmental and social topics.
G4-44
a.	Report the processes for evaluation of the highest governance
body's performance with respect to governance of economic,
environmental and social topics. Report whether such
evaluation is independent or not, and its frequency. Report
whether such evaluation is a self-assessment.
b.	Report actions taken in response to evaluation of the highest
governance body's performance with respect to governance
of economic, environmental and social topics, including,
as a minimum, changes in membership and organizational
practice.
Legend :

AR : Annual Report 2013-14

SR : Sustainability Report 2013-14

74 | GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index

Page Number (or Link)

Identified
Omission(s)

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

External
Assurance

AR : Corporate governance report :
Page 91

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

AR : Corporate governance report :
Page 91

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

AR :Corporate governance report :
Pages 91, 93, 98

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

AR : Corporate governance report :
Pages 94-97

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

AR : Corporate governance report :
Pages 99, Policy advocacy : Page 120

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

AR : Corporate governance report :
Pages 95-96

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Governance (contd.)
Disclosure requirements
General
Standard
Disclosures
G4-45
a.	Report the highest governance body's role in the identification
and management of economic, environmental and social
impacts, risks, and opportunities. Include the highest
governance body's role in the implementation of due diligence
processes.
b.	Report whether stakeholder consultation is used to support
the highest governance body's identification and management
of economic, environmental and social impacts, risks, and
opportunities.
G4-46
Report the highest governance body's role in reviewing the
effectiveness of the organization's risk management processes for
economic, environmental and social topics.
G4-47

G4-48

G4-49

G4-50

Legend :

Page Number (or Link)

AR : Risk management report :
Pages 39-41, Management discussion
and analysis : Pages 36-37,
SR : Statement from the Executive
Vice Chairman : Page 6

AR : Introductory section : Page 4,
Corporate governance report : Page 97,
SR : Statement from the Executive
Vice Chairman : Page 6
Report the frequency of the highest governance body's review
AR : Risk management report :
of economic, environmental and social impacts, risks, and
Pages 39-40, Corporate governance
opportunities.
report : Pages 93-97
Report the highest committee or position that formally reviews
AR : Page 108, SR : Statement from the
and approves the organization's sustainability report and ensures Executive Vice Chairman : Page 6
that all material Aspects are covered.
Report the process for communicating critical concerns to the
AR : Corporate governance report :
Pages 93, 97-99, Shareholder
highest governance body.
information : Page 102, Business
responsibility report : Pages 108,
111-112
Report the nature and total number of critical concerns that
AR : Introductory section
were communicated to the highest governance body and the
mechanism(s) used to address and resolve them.

AR : Annual Report 2013-14

Identified
Omission(s)

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

External
Assurance

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

SR : Sustainability Report 2013-14

GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index | 75

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Governance (contd.)
Disclosure requirements
General
Standard
Disclosures
G4-51
a.	Report the remuneration policies for the highest governance
body and senior executives for the below types of
remuneration :
•	 Fixed pay and variable pay
–– Performance-based pay
–– Equity-based pay
–– Bonuses
–– Deferred or vested shares
•	 Sign-on bonuses or recruitment incentive payments
•	 Termination payments
•	 Clawbacks
•	 Retirement benefits, including the difference between
benefit schemes and contribution rates for the highest
governance body, senior executives, and all other
employees
b.	Report how performance criteria in the remuneration policy
relate to the highest governance body's and senior executives'
economic, environmental and social objectives.
G4-52
Report the process for determining remuneration. Report
whether remuneration consultants are involved in
determining remuneration and whether they are independent
of management. Report any other relationships which the
remuneration consultants have with the organization.
G4-53
Report how stakeholders' views are sought and taken into
account regarding remuneration, including the results of votes
on remuneration policies and proposals, if applicable.
G4-54
Report the ratio of the annual total compensation for the
organization's highest-paid individual in each country of
significant operations to the median annual total compensation
for all employees (excluding the highest-paid individual) in the
same country.
G4-55

Legend :

Report the ratio of percentage increase in annual total
compensation for the organization's highest-paid individual in
each country of significant operations to the median percentage
increase in annual total compensation for all employees
(excluding the highest-paid individual) in the same country.
AR : Annual Report 2013-14

SR : Sustainability Report 2013-14

76 | GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index

Page Number (or Link)

Identified
Omission(s)

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

External
Assurance

AR : Corporate governance report :
Pages 92-93

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

AR : Corporate governance report :
Pages 95-96

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

AR : Corporate governance report :
Pages 95-96

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

AR : Corporate governance report :
Page 91, Statement pursuant to Section
212 of the Companies Act, 1956 :
Pages 24-27, SR : Materiality aspects
and scope : Page 11
AR : Corporate governance report :
Page 91, Statement pursuant to Section
212 of the Companies Act, 1956 :
Pages 24-27, SR : Materiality aspects
and scope : Page 11

The information is
subject to specific
confidentiality
constraints

Individual
No
compensation
is a confidential
information as per
the policy of the
Company
The information is Individual
No
subject to specific compensation
confidentiality
is a confidential
constraints
information as per
the policy of the
company

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Ethics and Integrity
Disclosure requirements
General
Standard
Disclosures
G4-56
Describe the organization's values, principles, standards and
norms of behavior such as codes of conduct and codes of ethics.
G4-57
Report the internal and external mechanisms for seeking
advice on ethical and lawful behavior, and matters related to
organizational integrity, such as helplines or advice lines.
G4-58
Report the internal and external mechanisms for reporting
concerns about unethical or unlawful behavior, and matters
related to organizational integrity, such as escalation through line
management, whistleblowing mechanisms or hotlines.

Page Number (or Link)

Identified
Omission(s)

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

AR : Page 108, Corporate governance
report : Page 99, SR : Page 19
AR : Page 108, Corporate governance
report : Pages 90, 98, SR : Page 19

–

–

–

–

–

–

AR : Page 108, Corporate governance
report : Pages 97-99, SR : Page 19

–

–

–

External
Assurance
Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67

Specific standard disclosures
Economic
Disclosure title
General
Standard
Disclosures
Economic performance
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on Management Approach

Page Number (or Link)

AR : Introductory section,
CEO and CFO Certification : Page 42
SR : Pages 10, 15
SR : Page 15

G4-EC1

Direct economic value generated and distributed

G4-EC2

Financial implications and other risks and opportunities for the
organization's activities due to climate change

AR : Risk management report :
Pages 39-41, Business responsibility
report : Page 118

G4-EC3

Coverage of the organization's defined benefit plan obligations

G4-EC4

Financial assistance received from government

SR : Talent management : Page 20,
AR : Retirement benefits to employees :
Page 50, Consolidated financial
statements : Page 83
AR : Management's discussion and
analysis : Page 31

Legend :

AR : Annual Report 2013-14

Identified
Omission(s)

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

External
Assurance

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67

The financial
The information
implications of the is currently
risk or opportunity unavailable

–

–

–

–

We are in the
process of
streamlining
the financial
implications of
climate change
impacts
–

–

Pages
66-67

Pages
66-67

SR : Sustainability Report 2013-14

GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index | 77

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Environmental
Disclosure title
General
Standard
Disclosures
Energy
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on Management Approach
G4-EN3

Energy consumption within the organization

G4-EN4

Energy consumption outside of the
organization

G4-EN5

Energy intensity

G4-EN6

Reduction of energy consumption

G4-EN7

Reductions in energy requirements of products
and services

Water
G4-DMA

Generic Disclosures on Management Approach

G4-EN8

Total water withdrawal by source

G4-EN9

Water sources significantly affected by
withdrawal of water
Percentage and total volume of water recycled
and reused

G4-EN10
Emissions
G4-DMA

G4-EN15

Legend :

Generic Disclosures on Management Approach

Direct greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
(Scope 1)

AR : Annual Report 2013-14

Page Number (or Link)

SR : Resource intensity – Powering change through
resource innovation : Page 40
SR : Resource intensity – Our resource footprint –
Energy : Pages 44-45, Data computational methods :
Page 47
SR : Resource intensity – Our resource footprint –
Energy : Pages 44-45, Data computational methods :
Page 47
SR : Resource intensity – Our resource footprint –
Energy : Pages 44-45
SR : Resource intensity – Our resource footprint –
Energy : Pages 44-45
Not applicable

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

External
Assurance

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

–

–

–

The Standard
Disclosure or part
of the Standard
Disclosure is not
applicable.

We are an IT
services and
consulting
company. Our
energy reduction
for the services
provided is already
covered under
EN6 above.

Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67
No

Reductions
in energy
requirements of
products and
services

Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67

SR : Resource intensity – Powering change through
resource innovation : Page 40
SR : Resource intensity – Our resource footprint –
Water : Page 43
SR : Resource intensity – Our resource footprint –
Water : Page 43
SR : Resource intensity – Our resource footprint –
Wastewater treatment : Page 44

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

SR : Statement from the Executive Vice Chairman –
Page 6, Powering change through resource innovation :
Page 40
SR : Resource intensity – Our resource footprint –
Emissions : Page 46, Data computational methods :
Pages 47-49

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

SR : Sustainability Report 2013-14

78 | GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index

Identified
Omission(s)

Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67
No

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Environmental (contd.)
Disclosure title
General
Standard
Disclosures
G4-EN16
Energy indirect greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions (Scope 2)

Page Number (or Link)

Identified
Omission(s)

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

External
Assurance

SR : Resource intensity – Our resource footprint –
Emissions : Page 46, Data computational methods :
Pages 47-49
G4-EN17
Other indirect greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions SR : Resource intensity – Our resource footprint –
(Scope 3)
Emissions : Page 46, Data computational methods :
Pages 47-49
G4-EN18
Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions intensity
SR : Resource intensity – Our resource footprint –
Emissions : Page 46, Data computational methods :
Pages 47-49
G4-EN19
Reduction of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions SR : Resource intensity – Our resource footprint –
Emission reduction initiatives : Pages 41-42, 44-45
G4-EN20
Emissions of ozone-depleting substances (ODS) SR : Resource intensity – Our resource footprint –
Emissions : Page 47
G4-EN21
NOx, SOx, and other significant air emissions
SR : Resource intensity – Our resource footprint –
Emissions : Pages 46, 47
Effluents and waste
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on Management Approach SR : Resource intensity – Powering change through
resource innovation : Page 40
G4-EN22
Total water discharge by quality and destination SR : Resource intensity – Wastewater treatment :
Page 44
G4-EN23
Total weight of waste by type and disposal
SR : Resource intensity – Waste management : Page 49
method
G4-EN24
Total number and volume of significant spills
SR : Resource intensity – Waste management : Page 50

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

G4-EN25

Weight of transported, imported, exported,
or treated waste deemed hazardous under the
terms of the Basel Convention Annex I, II, III,
and VIII, and percentage of transported waste
shipped internationally

Not applicable

–

The Standard
Disclosure or part
of the Standard
Disclosure is not
applicable

G4-EN26

Identity, size, protected status, and biodiversity
value of water bodies and related habitats
significantly affected by the organization's
discharges of water and runoff

SR : Resource intensity – Wastewater treatment :
Page 44

–

–

Legend :

AR : Annual Report 2013-14

Our operations
do not involve
transportation
of any waste
or hazardous
materials across
international
borders.
–

Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67
No

No

SR : Sustainability Report 2013-14

GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index | 79

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Environmental (contd.)
Disclosure title
General
Standard
Disclosures
Compliance
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on Management Approach
G4-EN29

Monetary value of significant fines and total
number of non-monetary sanctions for
non‑compliance with environmental laws and
regulations
Environmental grievance mechanisms
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on Management Approach
G4-EN34

Number of grievances about environmental
impacts filed, addressed, and resolved through
formal grievance mechanisms

Page Number (or Link)

Identified
Omission(s)

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

SR : Resource intensity – Powering change through
resource innovation : Page 40
SR : Resource intensity – Environmental compliance :
Page 43

–

–

–

–

–

–

SR : Statement from the Executive Vice Chairman :
Page 6
SR : Resource intensity : Page 43

–

–

–

–

–

–

External
Assurance

Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67

Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67

Social : Labor practices and decent work
Disclosure title
General
Standard
Disclosures
Employment
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on Management Approach
G4-LA1

Page Number (or Link)

SR : Social contract – Our commitment to social
contract : Page 14
SR : Social contract – Talent management : Page 20

Total number and rates of new employee hires
and employee turnover by age group, gender
and region
G4-LA2
Benefits provided to full-time employees that
SR : Social contract – Talent management : Page 20
are not provided to temporary or part-time
employees, by significant locations of operation
G4-LA3
Return to work and retention rates after
SR : Social contract – Equal opportunity : Page 26
parental leave, by gender
Labor / management relations
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on Management Approach SR : Social contract – Our commitment to social
contract : Page 14
G4-LA4
Minimum notice periods regarding operational SR : Social contract – Talent management : Page 20
changes, including whether these are specified
in collective agreements
Legend :

AR : Annual Report 2013-14

SR : Sustainability Report 2013-14

80 | GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index

Identified
Omission(s)

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

External
Assurance

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

–

–

–

Pages
66-67
No

Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Social : Labor practices and decent work (contd.)
Disclosure title
General
Standard
Disclosures
Occupational health and safety
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on Management Approach

G4-LA5

SR : Social contract – Our commitment to social
contract : Pages 14, Occupational health and safety :
Pages 27-29
SR : Social contract – Freedom of association : Page 21,
Occupational health and safety : Page 27

Percentage of total workforce represented in
formal joint management-worker health and
safety committees that help monitor and advise
on occupational health and safety programs
Type of injury and rates of injury, occupational SR : Social contract – Occupational health and safety :
diseases, lost days, and absenteeism, and total
Page 28
number of work-related fatalities, by region and
by gender

G4-LA6

G4-LA7

Workers with high incidence or high risk of
diseases related to their occupation
G4-LA8
Health and safety topics covered in formal
agreements with trade unions
Training and education
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on Management Approach
G4-LA9
G4-LA10

G4-LA11

Legend :

Page Number (or Link)

SR : Social contract – Occupational health and safety :
Page 27
SR : Social contract – Freedom of association : Page 21

SR : Social contract – Our commitment to social
contract : Page 14
Average hours of training per year per employee SR : Social contract – Talent management : Pages 22, 23
by gender, and by employee category
Programs for skills management and
SR : Social contract – Talent management : Pages 22-24
lifelong learning that support the continued
employability of employees and assist them in
managing career endings

Percentage of employees receiving regular
performance and career development reviews,
by gender and by employee category

AR : Annual Report 2013-14

SR : Social contract – Talent management – Performance
and career management : Page 25

Identified
Omission(s)

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

External
Assurance

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

Occupational
diseases rate
(ODR), lost
day rate (LDR),
absentee rate (AR)

The information
is currently
unavailable

We currently do
Pages
not have systems
66-67
in place to capture
information about
absenteeism rate
and occupational
disease rate.
Pages
–
66-67
Pages
–
66-67

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Trainings related
management of
career endings
resulting from
retirement or
termination of
employment

–

The information
is currently
unavailable.

–

We have a very
young workforce
with an average
age of about 27
years. Hence, we
have not planned
programs for
career ending at
the moment.
–

Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67

Pages
66-67

SR : Sustainability Report 2013-14

GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index | 81

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Social : Labor practices and decent work (contd.)
Disclosure title
General
Standard
Disclosures
Diversity and equal opportunity
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on Management Approach
G4-LA12

Page Number (or Link)

SR : Social contract – Our commitment to social
contract : Page 14
Composition of governance bodies and
AR : Corporate Governance Report : Pages 90-91,
breakdown of employees per employee category 94-97, 110, SR : Materiality aspects and scope : Page 11
according to gender, age group, minority group
membership, and other indicators of diversity

Supplier assessment for labor practices
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on Management Approach

SR : Social contract – Our commitment to social
contract : Page 14, Responsible Supply chain :
Pages 29-31,
Statement from the Executive Vice Chairman : Page 6
G4-LA14
Percentage of new suppliers that were screened SR : Social contract – Responsible supply chain :
using labor practices criteria
Page 29
G4-LA15
Significant actual and potential negative impacts SR : Social contract – Responsible supply chain :
for labor practices in the supply chain and
Pages 30, 31
actions taken
Labor practices grievance mechanisms
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on Management Approach SR : Social contract – Our commitment to social
contract : Page 14,
Statement from the Executive Vice Chairman : Page 6
G4-LA16
Number of grievances about labor practices
SR : Social contract – Equal opportunity – Hearing and
filed, addressed, and resolved through formal
resolving issues : Page 26
grievance mechanisms
Legend :

AR : Annual Report 2013-14

SR : Sustainability Report 2013-14

82 | GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index

Identified
Omission(s)

–

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

–

Breakdown of
The information
employees per
is currently
employee category unavailable.
minority group
membership, and
other indicators of
diversity

Explanation for
Omission(s)

–
We are
strengthening
our systems and
processes to
capture diversity
indicators at the
management
level across the
organization

External
Assurance

Pages
66-67
No

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

–

–

–

Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Social : Human rights
Disclosure title
General
Standard
Disclosures
Investment
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on Management Approach
G4-HR1

Total number and percentage of significant investment
agreements and contracts that include human rights clauses or
that underwent human rights screening
G4-HR2
Total hours of employee training on human rights policies or
procedures concerning aspects of human rights that are relevant
to operations, including the percentage of employees trained
Non-Discrimination
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on Management Approach

G4-HR3

Total number of incidents of discrimination and corrective
actions taken
Freedom of association and collective bargaining
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on Management Approach

G4-HR4

Operations and suppliers identified in which the right to
exercise freedom of association and collective bargaining may
be violated or at significant risk, and measures taken to support
these rights

Assessment
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on Management Approach

G4-HR9

Legend :

Total number and percentage of operations that have been
subject to human rights reviews or impact assessments

AR : Annual Report 2013-14

Page Number (or Link)

Identified
Omission(s)

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

External
Assurance

SR : Social contract – Our commitment
to social contract : Page 14
SR : Social contract – Compliance and
anti-corruption : Page 19, Human
rights : Page 25
SR : Social contract – Compliance
and anti-corruption : Page 25, Talent
enablement : Pages 23-24

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

SR : Social contract – Our commitment
to social contract : Page 14, Statement
from the Executive Vice Chairman :
Page 6
SR : Social contract – Equal opportunity
– Hearing and resolving issues : Page 26

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

SR : Social contract – Our commitment
to social contract : Page 14, Statement
from the Executive Vice Chairman :
Page 6
SR : Social contract – Talent
management – Freedom of association :
Page 21, Responsible supply chain :
Pages 29-31 (CBA in supply chain is
not relevant for our sector)

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

SR : Social contract – Our commitment
to social contract : Page 14, Statement
from the Executive Vice Chairman :
Page 6
SR : Social contract, Human rights :
Page 25, Responsible supply chain :
pages 29-31

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67

SR : Sustainability Report 2013-14

GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index | 83

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Social : Human rights (contd.)
Disclosure title
General
Standard
Disclosures
Supplier human rights assessment
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on Management Approach

Page Number (or Link)

Identified
Omission(s)

SR : Social contract – Statement from
–
the Executive Vice Chairman : Page 6,
Responsible supply chain :
Page 29
G4-HR10 Percentage of new suppliers that were screened using human
SR : Social contract – Responsible
–
rights criteria
supply chain : Page 29
G4-HR11 Significant actual and potential negative human rights impacts in SR : Social contract – Responsible
–
the supply chain and actions taken
supply chain : Page 30
Human rights grievance mechanisms
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on Management Approach
SR : Social contract – Our commitment
–
to social contract : Page 14, Human
rights : Page 25, Responsible supply
chain : page 29
G4-HR12 Number of grievances about human rights impacts filed,
SR : Social contract – Equal opportunity Number of
addressed, and resolved through formal grievance mechanisms
– Hearing and resolving issues : Page 26 grievances
for external
stakeholders
(suppliers and
local community)

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

External
Assurance

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

–

Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67

–

–

Pages
66-67

The information
is currently
unavailable

The process
Pages
of recording
66-67
the number
of grievances
for external
stakeholders –
suppliers and local
community, needs
to be streamlined

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

Social : Society
Disclosure title
General
Standard
Disclosures
Anti-corruption
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on Management Approach

G4-SO3

Total number and percentage of operations assessed for risks
related to corruption and the significant risks identified

G4-SO4

Communication and training on anti-corruption policies and
procedures
Confirmed incidents of corruption and actions taken

G4-SO5
Legend :

AR : Annual Report 2013-14

SR : Sustainability Report 2013-14

84 | GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index

Page Number (or Link)

SR : Materiality matrix : Page 10, Social
contract – Our commitment to social
contract : Page 14,
AR : Risk management report :
Pages 39-41, SR : Compliance and anticorruption : Page 19
SR : Social contract – Compliance and
anti-corruption : Page 19
SR : Social contract – compliance and
anti-corruption : Page 19

Identified
Omission(s)

External
Assurance

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

–

–

–

Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Social : Society (contd.)
Disclosure title
General
Standard
Disclosures
Compliance
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on Management Approach

G4-SO8

Monetary value of significant fines and total number of
non-monetary sanctions for non-compliance with laws and
regulations

Page Number (or Link)

Identified
Omission(s)

SR : Materiality matrix : Page 10, Social
contract – Our commitment to social
contract : Page 14
SR : Social contract – Compliance and
anti-corruption : Page 21, Client value :
Pages 16, 17

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for
Omission(s)

External
Assurance

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

Social : Product responsibility
Disclosure title
General
Standard
Disclosures
Product and service labeling
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on
Management Approach

Page Number (or Link)

Identified Omission(s)

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

Explanation for Omission(s)

SR : Social contract – Client
value : Page 16

DMA for product and service
labeling

The Standard
Disclosure or part
of the Standard
Disclosure is not
applicable

G4-PR3

Type of product and service
information required by the
organization's procedures for
product and service information
and labeling, and percentage of
significant product and service
categories subject to such
information requirements

Not applicable

The Standard
Disclosure or part
of the Standard
Disclosure is not
applicable

G4-PR4

Total number of incidents of
non-compliance with regulations
and voluntary codes concerning
product and service information
and labeling, by type of outcomes

Not applicable

G4-PR5

Results of surveys measuring
customer satisfaction

SR : Social contract  – Client
value : Page 16

Type of product and service
information required by the
organization's procedures
for product and service
information and labeling,
and percentage of significant
product and service categories
subject to such information
requirements
Total number of incidents
of non-compliance with
regulations and voluntary
codes concerning product
and service information and
labeling, by type of outcomes
–

The DMA specifically with respect to
Pages
product and service labeling is not
66-67
applicable given that we are an IT
services company and do not deal with
products. We have, however, included
our DMA on client satisfaction in the
‘Client value’ section of our report
We are an IT services company and do
No
not deal with products or services which
require labeling.

Legend :

AR : Annual Report 2013-14

The Standard
Disclosure or part
of the Standard
Disclosure is not
applicable

–

External
Assurance

We are an IT services company and do
No
not deal with products or services which
require labeling.

–

Pages
66-67

SR : Sustainability Report 2013-14

GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index | 85

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Social : Product responsibility (contd.)
Disclosure title
General
Standard
Disclosures
Marketing Communications
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on
Management Approach

G4-PR6

Page Number (or Link)

Sale of banned or disputed
products

G4-PR7

Total number of incidents of
non-compliance with regulations
and voluntary codes concerning
marketing communications,
including advertising, promotion,
and sponsorship, by type of
outcomes
Customer privacy
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on
Management Approach
G4-PR8
Total number of substantiated
complaints regarding breaches of
customer privacy and losses of
customer data
Compliance
G4-DMA
Generic Disclosures on
Management Approach

SR : Social contract – Our
commitment to social
contract : Page 14, Marketing
communication and brand
management : Page 18
Not applicable

Identified Omission(s)

–

Sale of banned or disputed
products

SR : Social contract – Marketing
communication and brand
management : Page 18

–

SR : Information security and
data privacy : Page 17
SR : Social contract –
Information security and data
privacy : Page 17

–

SR : Social contract –
Information security and data
privacy : Page 17, Materiality
matrix : Page 10

Reason(s) for
Omission(s)

–

The Standard
Disclosure or part
of the Standard
Disclosure is not
applicable
–

Explanation for Omission(s)

–

We are an IT services company and do
not deal with sale of any products –
banned or disputed

External
Assurance

Pages
66-67

No

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

–

–

Pages
66-67
Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

–

–

–

Pages
66-67

Note : Being an IT services company, we
are regulated by data privacy

G4-PR9

Legend :

Monetary value of significant fines
for non-compliance with laws
and regulations concerning the
provision and use of products and
services
AR : Annual Report 2013-14

SR : Social contract –
Information security and data
privacy section : Page 17

SR : Sustainability Report 2013-14

86 | GRI reporting framework G4 – Content index

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Acronyms
ASHI
ACTION

ASTD
APAC
AHRI
ASP
BPO
BMS
CC
CEO
CEA
CDP 3.0
CDP
CCB
CII
CRISIL
CTY
C-LIFE
CVS
CFG
CGR
CSR
CMO
DC
DCM
D&I
DSCI
DEFRA
DG
DR
ETA
EEB
ELF
ERM
ESAT
ESG
EPI
EMEA
ECG
FIS
FACE
FC
GEC
GHG
GJ
GRI
GVC
GAAP
GAR
GB
GDP
GRIHA
GWP

87 | Acronyms

Anti Sexual Harassment Initiative
Auditing inclusivity and diversity levels, Creating
change agents, Training managers, Initiating and
implementing work models, Organizing and
assisting affinity groups and Networking with
external bodies to benchmark practices
American Society for Talent and Development
Asia Pacific
Australian Human Resources Institute
Application Service Provision
Business Process Outsourcing
Building Management System
Campus Connect
Chief Executive Officer
Central Electricity Authority
Competency Development Program 3.0
Carbon Disclosure Project
Central Cooperative Bank
Confederation of Indian Industry
Credit Rating Information Services of India
Limited
Catch Them Young
Client value, Leadership by example, Integrity
and transparency, Fairness, Excellence
Client Value Survey
Client Facing Group
Corporate Governance Rating
Corporate Social Responsibility
Chief Marketing Officer
Development Center
Data Center Modernization
Diversity & Inclusion
Data Security Council of India
Department for Environment, Food and Rural
Affairs
Diesel generators
Disaster recovery
Education, Training and Assessment
Energy Efficiency in Buildings
Engagement Level Feedback
Enterprise Risk Management
Employee Satisfaction Survey
Environmental, Social and Governance
Energy Performance Index
Europe, Middle East and Africa
Electrocardiography
Federation of International Services
Facial Expression, Awareness, Compassion,
Emotions
Fiber Channel
Global Education Centre
Greenhouse gas
Giga Joules
Global Reporting Initiative
Governance and Value Creation
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
Global Academic Relations
Gigabyte
Gross Domestic Product
Green Rating for Integrated Habitat Assessment
Global Warming Potential

GHI
GW
GHI
GSM
GPS
HALE
HEAR
HR
HES
HFC
HSD
HSEMS
HVAC
ICT
IP
ISO
ISF
IFRS
ILI
InFLUENCE
iCOE
ITA
ICIP
ITSMA
IPCC
IoT
IWIN
IPr
IGLU
IDP
iESS
iSOP
IOPS
JAM
KM
kl
kW
kWh
LEED
LITMUS
LPG
LGBT
MAKE
MSA
MSMED
MBE
MT
MW
MIS
NGO
NASSCOM
NEM
NCWE
NCV
NOA
NOx
OHSMS

Global Horizontal Irradiance
Gigawatt
Global Horizontal Irradiance
Global System for Mobile Communications
Global Positioning System
Health Assessment and Lifestyle Enrichment
Hearing Employees and Resolving
Human Resources
Higher Education Support
Hydrofluorocarbon
High Speed Diesel
Health, Safety and Environmental
Management System
Heating, Ventilation and Air conditioning
Information and Communications Technology
Intellectual Property
International Organization for Standardization
Infosys Science Foundation
International Financial Reporting Standards
Infosys Leadership Institute
Infosys Framework for Learning Using External
Community Engagement
I, Citizen of Earth
Infosys Transition Advantage
Infosys Continuous Integration Platform
Interactive Technology Software and Media
Association
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Internet of Things
Infosys Women's Inclusivity Network
Individual Productivity Framework
Infosys Gay, Lesbian employees and You
Individual Development Program
Infosys Electronic Signature Solution
Infosys Scaling Outstanding Performance
Input Output Operations Per Second
Just a Minute
Knowledge Management
Kilo liter
Kilowatt
Kilowatt hour
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
Let's Interact on Themes that Matter to Us
Liquefied Petroleum Gas
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender
Most Admired Knowledge Enterprise
Master Service Agreement
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
Development
Minority Business Enterprises
Metric tonnes
Megawatt
Management Information System
Non-Governmental Organization
National Association of Software Companies
Net Energy Metering
National Council for Work Experience
Net Calorific Value
National Outsourcing Association
Nitrogen oxides
Occupational Health and Safety Management
System

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

OH&S
ODP
ODS
PMCoE
PSPD
PPE
PV
PLC
PCB
PCA
PACE
PACS
POS
REAP
RPO
RTO
R&D
SAN
SATA
SSD

Occupational Health & Safety
Ozone Depleting Potential
Ozone Depleting Substances
Project Management Center of Excellence
Predictability, Sustainability, Profitability and
De-risking
Personnel Protective Equipment
Photovoltaics
Power Line Communication
Pollution Control Board
Pressure Compensating Aerators
Partnership to Advance Clean Energy
Primary Agriculture Credit Societies
Point of Sale
Requirement Elicitation and Analysis Framework
Recovery Point Objective
Recovery Time Objective
Research & Development
Storage Area Network
Serial Advanced Technology Attachment
Solid State Disks

SAS
SCB
SOx
SEBI
STPi
STCCS
t
tCO2e
TCO
TAFF
UNGC
UNHRC
UTRC
UPS
VIVA
WBCSD
WBE
WEF
WWF

Serial Attached SCSI
State Cooperative Bank
Sulphur oxide
Securities and Exchange Board of India
Software Technology Park of India
Short Term Cooperative Credit Structure
Tonne
Tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent
Total Cost of Ownership
Talent Acquisition and Fulfillment Function
United Nations Global Compact
United Nations Human Rights Council
United Technologies Research Center
Uninterruptible Power Supply
Visioning, Inculcating, Valuing, and Assessing
World Business Council for Sustainable
Development
Women's Business Enterprises
World Economic Forum
World Wildlife Fund

Acronyms | 88

Infosys Sustainability Report 2013-14

Contacts
For queries relating to financial statements

For queries relating to Sustainability disclosures

Rajiv Bansal

Aruna C. Newton

Chief Financial Officer

Associate Vice President

Tel : 91 80 2852 1705
Fax : 91 80 2852 0754
Email : rajivbansal@infosys.com

Tel : 91 80 4961 4243, 91 80 2852 0261
Email : arunacnewton@infosys.com

For queries relating to shares / dividend / compliance

Email : foundation@infosys.com

Parvatheesam K.
Chief Risk & Compliance Officer and Company Secretary

Tel : 91 80 4116 7750
Fax : 91 80 2852 0754
Email : parvatheesam_k@infosys.com

Infosys Foundation
Infosys Science Foundation
Email : ISF@infosys.com

Suggestions and feedback
Email : sustainability@infosys.com

Creative concept and design by Communication Design Group, Infosys Limited.
© 2014 Infosys Limited, Bangalore, India. Infosys acknowledges the proprietary rights in the trademarks and product names of other companies mentioned in this report.

Contacts | 89

www.infosys.com

To read the report online :
http://www.infosys.com/sustainability-report-2014

