I

N T n s iv
A
I
L ehe
P
r
OM omp
C
G4 e - C
I
c
G R rd a n
co
c
nA

e

SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2014
ITC LIMITED

Creating
around
6 million
sustainable
livelihoods

38% of
energy consumption
at ITC is from
renewable sources

The only Company
in the world to be carbon,
water and solid waste
recycling positive

ITC Hotels Greenest
Luxury
Hotel Chain in
the world

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

ITC’s Sustainability Report is one among the first in India under “In Accordance
- Comprehensive” category with “Materiality Matters” confirmation from
Global Reporting Initiative (GRI). The Report is the first in India that has been
third party assured at the highest criteria of “reasonable assurance” as per
International Standard on Assurance Engagements (ISAE) 3000.

Explanatory Notes:
GRI offers two options for ‘In Accordance’ reporting with the G4 Guidelines: ‘Core’ and ‘Comprehensive’, with focus on Material Aspects and
Disclosures on Management Approach for all Material Aspects being the primary requirement in both levels.
Core Option: Requires reporting on General Standard Disclosures such as organisational profile, stakeholder engagement and governance, and
on at least one indicator per Material Aspect.
Comprehensive Option: In addition to General Standard Disclosures under Core option, this requires reporting on strategy, governance and ethics
& integrity, and also on all indicators for all Material Aspects.
Reasonable Assurance as per ISAE 3000: ISAE 3000 uses the term reasonable assurance engagement and limited assurance engagement to
distinguish between the two types of assurance engagement a practitioner is permitted to perform. The objective of a reasonable assurance
engagement is a reduction in assurance engagement risk to an acceptably low level in the circumstances of the engagement as the basis for
a positive form of expression of the practitioner’s conclusion. The objective of a limited assurance engagement is a reduction in assurance
engagement risk to a level that is acceptable in the circumstances of the engagement, but where that risk is greater than for a reasonable
assurance engagement, as the basis for a negative form of expression of the practitioner’s conclusion.

Contents
04

Chairman’s Statement

10

Organisational Profile
Supply Chain

24

Certifications, Honours
and Awards

28

32

Stakeholder Engagement
and Materiality

44

Key Impacts, Risks
and Opportunities

54

Report Profile, Scope
and Boundary

60

Governance Structure

174

68

GRI Index

Category: Economic
Management Approach

70

Performance

70

82

191

Food Supplement Index

195

Alignment to Business
Responsibility Report
Principles

Category: Environment
Management Approach

86

Energy

88

Air Emissions

94

Water Management

100

Recycling and
Waste Management

112

Raw Materials

118

Biodiversity

122

126

196

Annexures
Policies and Guidelines

196

GHG Inventory

202

Memberships and
Affiliations

203

205

Independent
Assurance Statements

Category: Social
Labour Practices and
Decent Work

128

Human Rights
Significant Investments

143

Social Investments Mission Sunehra Kal

146

Product Responsibility

166

Environment
Carbon Positive:
9 Consecutive years

Soil & Moisture conservation
to 1,49,000 hectares

Water Positive:
12 years in a row

ITC’s Watershed Development initiative
brings precious water to 1,49,000 hectares of
moisture-stressed areas

Solid Waste Recycling
Positive: for the last 7 years

38% Renewable Energy
38% of ITC’s total energy consumption is
from renewable sources

Greenest luxury Hotel Chain
All ITC’s premium luxury Hotels are LEED®
Platinum certified

1,63,000 hectares greened
ITC’s Social and Farm Forestry initiative has
greened 1,63,000 hectares

02

Economic

Social

Market capitalisation:
Over $ 45 billion

Creating around 6 million
sustainable livelihoods

Turnover: Over $ 7 billion

Creating community assets

26% Compound annual
growth in total shareholder
returns over the last 18 years

Strengthening the agri production base of
nearly 4 lakh farmers

Educating 3,00,000 children

Over 31,000 employees

ITC’s Primary Education initiative
educated over 3,00,000 children

has

ITC Group provides direct employment to
more than 31,000 people

Benefitting 4 million farmers

Powering growth with
multiple business drivers

ITC’s globally acknowledged e-Choupal
initiative is the world’s largest rural digital
infrastructure benefitting over 4 million farmers

Diversified multi-business conglomerate
spanning FMCG, Hotels, Paperboards
&
Packaging,
Agri
Business
and
Information Technology

40,000 sustainable
livelihoods for rural women

Powered by the vitality of
world-class brands

ITC’s Women’s Empowerment initiative has
created nearly 40,000 sustainable livelihoods

Animal husbandry services
for 10,00,000 milch animals
ITC’s Livestock Development initiative has
provided animal husbandry services to over
10,00,000 milch animals

70 million person-days of
employment generated
ITC’s Social and Farm Forestry initiative
has generated over 70 million person-days
of employment

03

Chairman’s
Statement

have great pleasure in presenting ITC’s Sustainability Report 2014.
With this edition, it is the 11th consecutive year of publishing an independently verified
Sustainability Report. It is a matter of even greater satisfaction that this Report will be one
of the first in India to be prepared in accordance with the new G4 guidelines of the Global
Reporting Initiative (GRI), ahead of the transition deadline of 2015. The last ten years of
conforming to the GRI guidelines at the highest levels of reporting has provided valuable
insights in the pursuit of our journey to be an exemplar in sustainability practices.
I am also happy to once again reaffirm ITC’s support to the principles of the United
Nations Global Compact. It is indeed gratifying that the Company’s social interventions are
contributing meaningfully to the UN Millennium Development Goals.
ITC’s sustainability journey has been challenging yet rewarding. Today it is indeed a matter
of pride that the Company has been able to generate sustainable livelihood opportunities for
around 6 million people. Relentless efforts to create benchmarks in environmental excellence
have led the Company to achieve the unique global distinction of
being Carbon Positive for 9 successive years, Water Positive for 12
ITC’s Abiding consecutive years and Solid Waste Recycling Positive for the last
7 years.
Vision
These milestones reflect the tireless efforts in realising ITC’s abiding
Vision to put societal value creation at the heart of its business strategy. It is a reaffirmation
of our belief that businesses must make sustainable and inclusive growth a cornerstone of its
strategic framework. This conviction is premised on some stark realities confronting the world
today. Tremendous advancements in science and technology as well as a growing consumer
market have created unbounded business opportunities. However, it is an unassailable fact that
the limits to future growth will emerge predominantly from the largely unaddressed societal
challenges of widespread poverty and environmental degradation.
This realisation has inspired our Vision and commitment to sub-serve larger national priorities. A
Vision that has also spurred innovation to build societal value by harnessing the transformational
capacity, creativity and vitality of the organisation. It is ITC’s resolve to shape a new dimension
of corporate social action by simultaneously generating sustainable livelihoods and natural
capital even as it pursues enduring wealth creation for its shareholders. This triple bottom line
approach is at the foundation of the theme of this Report – “For All Our Tomorrows.”

Why is
Sustainability
important for
Business ?

04

Global And National
Challenges
This chosen path to contribute to a more secure future assumes
larger significance in our current context. The global economy is
struggling to raise itself from the morass it had sunk into in the
aftermath of the financial crisis. Simultaneously, social challenges

are assuming scales seldom witnessed before. Amongst the issues that are vying for urgent
attention are the potentially catastrophic combination of growing unemployment, widening
social inequities and the threat of climate change. The World Bank’s World Development
Report estimates that 620 million youth, a majority of them women, are neither working
nor looking for work. A new term, NEET – Not in Education, Employment or Training – has
tragically become a part of the contemporary lexicon. This mass of disillusioned youth facing
an uncertain and hopeless future is a potential ground for social unrest and turmoil.
The dimensions of these challenges in India are even more daunting. Our pride in becoming
the world’s third largest economy in terms of Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) is overshadowed by our distressingly low rank in the Human Development Index (HDI) at 134 among
187 countries. The demographic advantage of being one of the world’s youngest countries
can turn to become our largest concern, if gainful employment cannot be ensured to the 12
million that join the workforce every year. Therefore economic growth will have no meaning
unless it creates sustainable livelihood opportunities in a country where
an estimated 600 million live in multi-dimensional poverty.
Extreme weather swings triggered by climate change, devastating
loss of biodiversity and life-giving ecological systems make the
future more vulnerable especially for those mired in chronic
poverty. The latest report by the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) has warned of an increased risk to
security of food and drinking water due to the impact of global
warming, drought, floods and erratic rainfall. India, Bangladesh
and China, home to a large section of the world’s population are
said to be particularly at a higher risk. Therefore, growth strategies
that nations and corporations employ must embrace
a distinct effort to preserve and replenish precious
environmental resources.
The enormity of these societal challenges cannot
be mitigated by a solution set that just bolts on
some sustainability components to an old
economic model that has failed to deliver
growth with equity. It is time that we
engender a paradigm shift to redefine value

05

by aligning all economic activity to a super-ordinate goal of creating larger societal value;
strategies that go far beyond material wealth creation alone to also enrich environmental and
social capital.

ITC’s Sustainability Approach And
Action
It is my firm belief that Businesses possess unique strengths to make a much larger
contribution to society. If the creative and innovative capacities that businesses employ to
create world-class products and brands are leveraged to deliver social initiatives that serve
a larger national objective, it can have a transformative impact on society. Moreover, the
physical presence in communities around their business operations gives them a much larger
opportunity to directly engage in synergistic activities that can create livelihoods and add
to preservation of natural capital. More than financial resources, private enterprises also
possess the more crucial managerial capability to ensure efficient delivery of social projects.

If the
creative
and innovative
capacities that
businesses
employ to
create worldclass products
and brands are
leveraged to
deliver social
initiatives that
serve a larger
national objective,
it can have a
transformative
impact on
society.

06

ITC’s abiding Vision to create larger societal value for the nation and its stakeholders has powered
a multi-pronged strategy to address the larger challenges
of widespread social inequities and environmental
Strategic
degradation. The key priorities of this strategic objective
is to leverage its enterprise strengths to contribute to
Objectives
the creation of large scale sustainable livelihoods and
And Key Priorities
environmental resources. Towards this, ITC has crafted
unique and innovative interventions within the ambit of
its operations as well as in partnership with stakeholder communities to deliver superior triple
bottom line performance.
Nearly 700 million people living in rural India have a direct and symbiotic dependence on climate
sensitive sectors (agriculture, forest, fisheries) and natural resources (water, bio-diversity,
mangroves, coastal zones, grasslands) for their subsistence and livelihoods. Limited options of
alternative off-farm employment combined with endemic poverty continue to imperil the livelihood
security of millions of small and marginal farmers, mainly in the rain-fed agricultural regions.
Recognising the complexity and scale of these issues, ITC’s Integrated Rural Development
Programme has been crafted to empower farmers and
raise rural incomes, while at the same time enabling a
Building Social
comprehensive development of the rural ecosystem. The
celebrated ITC e-Choupal is a case in point. Farmers are
And Environmental
provided with critical information and relevant knowledge
Capital
on farm productivity, prices and markets through the
ITC e-Choupal. Customised extension services directly
contribute to enhancing farm yields. This platform also enables access to cost-effective quality
inputs for better productivity besides expanding the reach to markets. To offset agri-income

volatility as well as build capacities for investment, avenues for supplementary non-farm
incomes have been created through the Choupal Livestock Development and the Choupal
Women Empowerment programmes. The Choupal Watershed Development as well as Social
& Farm Forestry Programmes augment natural resources to enable higher productivity, create
a green cover and restore soil health. It is indeed heartening that the effectiveness of these
programmes has also led to partnerships with several State Governments and the National Bank
for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) on such watershed development projects.
The innovative models designed to deliver these projects have enabled us to achieve significant
scales of operation. The ITC e-Choupal has benefitted around 4 million farmers. The Social &
Farm Forestry programme has greened over 1,60,000 hectares, generating over 70 million person
days of employment. The Watershed development programme has enabled soil and moisture
conservation of over 1,48,000 hectares benefiting over 1,27,000 households. The Women’s
Empowerment Programme has created sustainable livelihood opportunities for nearly 40,000
women, either through micro-enterprises, or assistance with loans to pursue income generating
activities. The Livestock Development programme has provided animal husbandry services to over
10,00,000 animals, increasing milk yields substantially.

Today
38 % of
ITC’s energy
consumption is
from renewable
sources. All the
premium luxury
ITC Hotels are
LEED® Platinum
certified green
buildings.

It is well known that one of the causes for social inequity is the inequity of opportunity,
especially due to lack of proper education and training. To address this challenge, ITC has
implemented focussed programmes on Primary Education, Skill Development and Vocational
Training. The objective is to increase enrolments, minimise drop-outs, provide infrastructural
support to Government schools as well as to expand vocational livelihood opportunities. Over
3,30,000 rural children have been benefitted, helping them to build a better future.
We believe that it is vital to significantly enhance the talent pool of youth from disadvantaged
communities by equipping them with the necessary skills or qualifications and make them
more employable in the formal sectors of the economy. The affirmative action initiatives of
the Company have had a direct and tangible impact on the lives of nearly 84,000 beneficiaries
belonging to disadvantaged sections of society, spread over 13 states of the country.
In addition to the large scale social interventions outlined above, ITC’s sustainability objectives
also encompass initiatives within the ambit of ITC’s manufacturing and service operations.
ITC continuously strives to improve processes and systems at all
its Units to minimise its environmental impact as far as possible,
Achieving
create a work environment that is safe, healthy, productive and
Environmental fair for its employees and proactively engage with its suppliers
and partners to maximise value for all stakeholders. The
Excellence
Company’s Units continue to achieve substantial improvements
in the consumption of energy and water as well as in effluent
management. Specific details are provided in other sections of the Report. Management
systems and standards in ITC conform to relevant national and international standards and
are integrated into its development programmes as applicable to its individual businesses.
As part of its strategy for climate change mitigation and adaptation, ITC has also invested
significantly in renewable energy generation. Today, 38 % of its energy consumption is from
renewable sources, with a target to reach 50 % over the next 5 years.

07

ITC has also been a frontrunner in the establishment of green buildings in India. It is a matter of
justifiable pride that all the premium luxury ITC Hotels are LEED® Platinum certified. The ITC
Green Centre has been re-certified as the highest rated green building in the world. The latest
addition to our hotel group – the ITC Grand Chola - a 600-key super-premium luxury hotel
complex in Chennai, is the world’s largest LEED® Platinum certified green hotel. This property
has also secured a 5 Star GRIHA rating, the highest national rating for green buildings in
India. The recently commissioned commercial building ITC Green Centre at Manesar has also
received the LEED® Platinum certification. In addition it has been awarded the BEE 5 Star
rating by the Bureau of Energy Efficiency, Government of India. The green building movement
continues to gain momentum in ITC with several of its factories now being LEED® certified.
Based on ITC’s stakeholder engagements during the year, the Sustainability and CSR Policies
were revisited to enable prioritised consideration of the economic, environmental and social
impacts that are important to the organisation as well as its stakeholders. These Boardapproved policies form the bedrock of the Company’s approach and strategies in this context.

A
paradigm
change can
take place when
consumers,
investors, and
civil society make
an enlightened
choice in favour
of products
and services
of responsible
companies,
thereby making
societal value
creation an
important part
of a company’s
value
proposition.

08

An acknowledged leader in sustainability practices, the Company has partnered with the
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) in setting up a Centre of Excellence for Sustainable
Development. This Centre is engaged in a wide spectrum of value-added and targeted
initiatives that create awareness, provide thought leadership, build capacity amongst Indian
enterprises and reward exemplary performances in the area of sustainability.

Being Future-Ready
Despite the tremendous strides made in ITC’s sustainability journey, the road ahead is not
without its challenges. We compete in a market where many have not adopted a broader
canvas of contributing to larger societal goals, but are largely focussed in the narrow pursuit
of financial competitiveness alone. Therefore, for companies like ITC that synergise superior
financial performance together with the creation of large-scale ecological and social capital,
it is a continuing challenge to mobilise a much higher level of resources and organisational
creativity to ensure meaningful triple bottom line contribution. Unfortunately markets, as
they are structured today, reward only financial performance and do not prize companies
that create larger societal value. However, a paradigm change can take place if strong market
drivers emerge to support corporates that innovate to deliver larger sustainable and inclusive
value. This important change will take place when consumers, investors, and civil society
make an enlightened choice in favour of products and services of responsible companies,
thereby making societal value creation an important part of a company’s value proposition.
Preferential government policy and incentives in favour of such companies will lend even
further support to companies that sub-serve larger national priorities.
ITC’s commitment to creating enduring value is manifest in its Vision, Values and Vitality that
have created a future-ready organisation with a growing contribution to creating large-scale
societal value. This vision is inspired by the Company’s credo of “Let’s Put India First” as well as

its values of Trusteeship, Transparency, Empowerment, Accountability and Ethical Corporate
Citizenship, which are the cornerstones of ITC’s Corporate Governance philosophy.
We recognise that the Company’s capacity to create societal value will crucially depend on the
continued robust growth of our businesses. ITC’s aspiration to be a strong engine of growth
for the Indian economy is manifest in its strategy to create multiple drivers of growth that
will make a substantial and ever growing contribution to its stakeholders and the nation. By
investing in the creation of world-class brands, supported by extensive R&D shaped at the
ITC Life Sciences and Technology Centre and by leveraging all its enterprise strengths, the
Company will continue to offer competitive and superior value propositions to its customers.
ITC’s world-class Indian brands will ensure that larger value is created, captured and retained
in the country for national development and growth.
This Sustainability Report with its theme “For All Our Tomorrows” is once again a re-dedication
of our pledge to create enduring value for our stakeholders. I hope our sincere efforts to shape
a sustainable future will continue to foster a promising tomorrow for the generations to come.

ITC’s
world-class
Indian brands
will ensure that
larger value is
created, captured
and retained
in the country
for national
development
and growth.

Y C Deveshwar
Chairman, ITC Limited
May, 2014

09

Organisational
Profile

Powering Growth with
Multiple Business
Drivers

Creating World-Class
Indian Brands

FMCG

Hotels

Paperboards, Paper
and Packaging

Agri Business

Information
Technology

ITC Limited is one of India’s most valuable corporations with
sustained performance in creating enduring value for the nation.
Inspired by a vision to sub-serve larger national goals, ITC has
progressively worked towards creating long-term shareholder value
along with the enhancement of societal and environmental capital.

Livelihood Creation
Enterprise Strengths

$ 45
billion
Market
Capitalisation

ITC has
aggressively
pursued a
strategy of
diversification
that has enabled
it to unleash
multiple drivers
of growth for
the Indian
economy.

12

With a turnover
of $ 7 billion
and a market
capitalisation of
$ 45 billion, ITC
has aggressively
pursued a strategy
of diversification that has enabled
it to unleash multiple drivers of
growth for the Indian economy. This
is backed by ITC’s formidable array of
enterprise strengths of deep consumer
insights, manufacturing excellence,
international quality products, globally
contemporary business processes,
agri-sourcing, excellent trade marketing
and distribution, world-class human
capital, investments in cutting edge R&D
and ceaseless innovation. This strategy
has enabled ITC to create a bouquet
of vibrant world-class Indian brands
across business segments that have
demonstrated immense vitality in the
global Indian marketplace. ITC has today
created over 50 energetic brands across
segments that not only delight millions
of households, but also contribute
significantly to the
greater national
imperative to
create, capture
and retain value
for the Indian
economy.

ITC’s larger
commitment is
reflected in its
inclusive models
that deliver largescale societal and
environmental
value. The Company has spearheaded
game-changing development models
in partnership with farmers and local
rural communities to implement ITC’s
comprehensive social investments
programmes. The partnership with
local communities are key to the
success of these programmes, as
they foster a bottom-up participatory
approach that encourages a sense
of ownership in the process. These
programmes have enhanced incomes
and improved the quality of life
through the creation of sustainable
livelihood opportunities, apart from
augmenting natural resources, which
is critical for the sustenance of rural
communities. Through its businesses
and associated value chains, ITC has
supported the generation of around
6 million livelihoods, touching the
lives of many
living at the
margins in rural
India.

Transformational Impact
Achievements
ITC’s model of
inclusive growth
stems from its
triple bottom
line approach to
business, that
simultaneously
builds economic, social and
environmental capital. Today, ITC is a
global exemplar in sustainability and
inclusive growth. Its sustainability
initiatives and CSR programmes,
like the celebrated e-Choupal,
Social & Farm Forestry, Watershed
Development, Animal Husbandry and
Women’s Empowerment, have had a
transformational impact on rural India.
It is the only enterprise in the world of
comparable dimensions to be Carbon
Positive (9 years in a row), sequestering
nearly twice the amount of carbon it
emits; Water Positive (12 consecutive
years), creating twice the rainwater
harvesting potential than it consumes;
and Solid Waste Recycling Positive (for
the last 7 years). 38% of the total energy
requirement of the Company is met
from renewable sources, a testimony
to its commitment to adopting a low
carbon growth path. All ITC’s premium
luxury hotels have the unique distinction
of being LEED®
Platinum certified,
making it the
world’s greenest
luxury hotel chain.

ITC has received
national and global
recognition for
its multi-faceted
achievements. It
has been rated
among the World’s
Best Big Companies, Asia’s ‘Fab 50’
and one of India’s Most Valuable
Companies by Business Today. It
has been ranked as the world’s 8th
largest ‘sustainable value creator’
among consumer goods companies
globally, according to a report by the
Boston Consulting Group (BCG). ITC
Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar has been
ranked the 7th Best Performing CEO
in the world by the Harvard Business
Review in its January-February edition
2013. Mr Deveshwar has also been
conferred the Padma Bhushan, one of
the country’s highest civilian honours,
for his leadership in transforming
ITC into an
organisation
with a deep
commitment to
national
priorities of
sustainable and
inclusive growth.

ITC’s
sustainability
initiatives and
CSR programmes,
like the celebrated
e-Choupal, Social
& Farm Forestry,
Watershed
Development,
Animal Husbandry
and Women’s
Empowerment,
have had a
transformational
impact on rural
India.

13

Fast Moving
Consumer Goods
Keeping pace with the rapid growth of the
FMCG industry in India, ITC has significantly
scaled up its presence in this growing sector.
Its impressive bouquet of offerings includes
Branded Packaged Foods, Personal Care
Products, Cigarettes, Lifestyle Retailing,
Education and Stationery products, and
Safety Matches and Incense Sticks (Agarbatti).
Within a relatively short span of time, ITC has
established several strong consumer brands
in the Indian FMCG market.
ITC leverages its institutional strengths
including focus on quality and innovation and
differentiation, backed by deep consumer

ITC
leverages
its institutional
strengths
including focus
on quality and
innovation and
differentiation,
backed by
deep consumer
insights, world
class R&D and
an efficient
and responsive
supply chain,
to consolidate
its position as
a leader in the
FMCG industry
in India.

14

insights, world class R&D and an efficient
and responsive supply chain, manufacturing
excellence and extensive distribution
infrastructure to consolidate its position as a
leader in the FMCG industry in India.

Branded Packaged
Foods
ITC’s Branded Packaged Foods Businesses
are one of the fastest growing in India.
Backed by significant investments in product
development, innovation and manufacturing
technology, ITC’s Foods portfolio includes
staples, spices, biscuits, snack foods, instant
noodles, confectionery and ready-to-eat

meals. Driven by the market standing and
consumer franchise of its popular brands Aashirvaad, Sunfeast, Bingo!, Kitchens of
India, mint-o, Candyman and Yippee! Over the
past 5 years, the business has grown at an
impressive rate faster than that of the industry.
Last year, several new and innovative products
were added to the existing assortment of food
products. The Biscuits and Confectionery
categories saw the launch of premium and
innovative products with the introduction of
‘Sunfeast Delishus’ gourmet cookies in two
delectable variants – ‘Nut Biscotti’ and ‘Nut
and Raisins’, and ‘Candyman Jellicious’ in
the jelly segment. The Sunfeast portfolio was
further augmented with the Farmlite range
of health biscuits with oats and wheat fibre,
available in two variants - almonds and raisins.

15

Personal Care
Products
ITC’s range of bath and grooming products
has redefined consumer perceptions and
preferences through world-class offerings.
Anchored on extensive consumer research,
innovation and product development, ITC’s
personal care portfolio offers products with
clearly differentiated benefits to qualityseeking consumers. ITC’s Personal Care
portfolio under the ‘Essenza Di Wills’, ‘Fiama
Di Wills’, ‘Vivel Cell Renew’, ‘Vivel’, ‘Engage’
and ‘Superia’ brands includes bodycare,
skincare and fragrances. In keeping with
its focus on addressing various consumer
benefit segments through the introduction

16

of innovative and differentiated products,
the Business positioned Fiama Di Wills Gel
Bathing Bar with skin conditioners as India’s
first skin conditioning shower gel in a bar
format and modernised the Vivel portfolio
with the launch of a unique skin nourishing
range of soaps. New, visibly differentiated
dual colour soaps were also introduced to
strengthen the brand value proposition of
nourishment through skin foods. The year
also witnessed the launch of the second
edition of the Fiama Di Wills Couture Spa
Range of Gel Bathing Bars enriched with gold,
skin conditioners and skin care enhancing

ingredients. These interventions have been
well received by consumers fortifying ITC’s
presence in the Personal Care industry.
The year also marked ITC’s foray into the
fast-growing Deodorants market with the
successful launch of ‘Engage’ - a first-tomarket range of deodorants for both men and
women. The brand has been well received in
the market garnering impressive consumer
franchise in a relatively short span of time.

Cigarettes
ITC has enhanced its market standing
through its unwavering focus on innovation,
differentiated
best–in–class
offerings,
quality,
technology
and
exemplary
environmental performance.

Lifestyle Retailing
ITC’s Lifestyle Retailing Business has
established a nationwide retailing presence
to offer best-in-class fashion through a
growing retail franchise through its ‘Wills
Lifestyle’ and ‘John Players’ brands. The two
brands of ITC’s Lifestyle Retailing Business
reach out to over 3,200 outlets with the retail
presence of Wills Lifestyle having expanded
to nearly 100 exclusive stores in 40 cities
and more than 700 ‘shop-in-shops’ in leading
departmental stores and multi-brand outlets,
servicing consumers who seek the most
contemporary, premium pret fashion apparel.

The
two brands
of ITC’s Lifestyle
Retailing Business
reach out to over
3,200 outlets.

17

Wills Lifestyle is a strongly established
brand with its premium imagery, vibrant
product portfolio and international shopping
experience. The Wills Lifestyle portfolio has
expanded over time to now having distinct
wardrobe offers in the formal wear, casual
wear, club wear and high-end occasion wear.
ITC has also established ‘John Players’ as a
brand embodying the spirit of the modern
youth that is playful, fashionable and cool. The
latest addition in lifestyle retail, ‘johnplayers.
jeans’ is the new language for the fashionforward youth, featuring an innovative
collection of denims and casual wear in edgy
styling, bold patterns and contemporary fits.
The presence of ‘John Players’ was expanded
to 350 flagship stores and 1,400 multi brand
outlets and departmental stores.

18

Education and
Stationery Products
ITC’s Education and Stationery brands ‘Classmate’ and ‘Paperkraft’ offer consumers
a wide range of differentiated products
addressing the specific needs of each
segment. Classmate’s portfolio today
comprises offerings spanning notebooks,
writing instruments including pens and
pencils, scholastic products such as geometry
boxes, scales, erasers and sharpeners as
well as art stationery such as wax crayons,
colour pencils and sketch pens. With a view
to expanding the market and enlarging the
consumer base, ITC also launched a value

With
a view to
expanding
the market and
enlarging the
consumer base,
ITC also launched
a value notebook
brand - christened
‘Saathi’- in select
States this year.

brand - christened ‘Saathi’- in select States
this year.
The Classmate notebook is a manifestation
of the environmental capital built by ITC in its
paper business. While the notebook cover is
made from recycled board sourced from ITC’s
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) certified
Kovai mill, the paper used in the notebooks
leverages ITC’s world-class fibre line at
Bhadrachalam which is India’s first ozone
treated elemental chlorine free facility.
Additionally, the collaborative supply chain
established by the Business comprising 900
customers and 30 third party manufacturers,
provides indirect employment to over 5,000
people. The small-scale manufacturers,
with support from the Company, have built
impressive quality and delivery capability
resulting in a majority of them being certified
to ISO 9001:2008 standards.

Safety Matches
and Incense sticks
(Agarbattis)
ITC’s Agarbatti category is driven by a
growing franchise for the `Mangaldeep’
brand, superior consumer experience and
enhanced distribution reach. The product

portfolio was augmented during the year
with the launch of variants such as ‘Sadhvi’,
‘Mogra’ and ‘Sambrani’ under the umbrella
brand Mangaldeep. ITC has sustained its
market leadership in the Safety Matches
category leveraging a strong brand portfolio
across all market segments. The Matches and
Agarbatti Business continues to contribute
to ITC’s commitment to the ‘Triple Bottom
Line’, supporting over 18,000 livelihoods
mainly amongst rural women through smallscale and cottage sector units and women’s
self-help groups. The Business continues
to partner small and medium enterprises in
improving their processes and raising quality
standards.

18,000
livelihoods mainly
amongst rural
women through
small-scale and
cottage sector
units and women’s
self-help groups
supported by
the Matches and
Agarbatti Business

19

Hotels
ITC Hotels, with its credo of “Responsible
Luxury”, stands apart not only for its exquisite
signature properties, cuisine and service
excellence but also for being the greenest luxury
hotel chain in the world, with all ITC’s premium
luxury hotels being LEED® (Leadership in Energy
and Environmental Design) Platinum certified.
In line with this philosophy, ITC Hotels integrates
world-class green practices with contemporary
design elements to deliver the best of luxury
in the greenest possible manner. ITC’s hotels
have pioneered the concept of branded cuisine
in India with globally acclaimed restaurants
including Bukhara, Dum Pukht and Dakshin. ITC

ITC
Hotels
integrates
world-class green
practices with
contemporary
design elements
to deliver the
best of luxury
in the greenest
possible
manner.

20

has also set new benchmarks in wellness with its
Kaya Kalp Spa brand that offers a new dimension
in luxury and an enriching experience.
ITC’s Hotels Business maintained its position as
one of the fastest growing hospitality chains in
India, with more than 100 properties in over 70
locations. It operates under four distinct brands
– ‘ITC Hotels’ for ‘luxury’, ‘WelcomHotel’ in the
‘five star segment’, ‘Fortune’ in the ‘mid-market
to upscale segment’ and ‘WelcomHeritage’ in
the ‘heritage leisure segment.’
ITC’s Hotels business, with its world-class
properties, globally benchmarked levels of
service excellence and customer centricity, is
well positioned to sustain its leadership status in

the Industry and to emerge as the largest hotel
chain in the country over the next few years.

Paperboards, Paper
and Packaging
PAPERBOARDS AND SPECIALTY
PAPERS BUSINESS
ITC’s Paperboards & Specialty Papers Business
is India’s largest, technologically advanced
and most eco-friendly in this segment.
The business caters to a wide spectrum of
packaging, graphic, communication, writing,
printing and specialty paper requirements
through its 4 world-class manufacturing
units, which are today FSC Chain of Custody
certified. ITC is the first paper company in India
to obtain the Forest Stewardship CouncilForest Management (FSC-FM) certification.
ITC’s Paperboards and Paper Business is
an icon of environmental stewardship. The
Company established the country’s first

Elemental Chlorine Free fibre line and
Ozone Bleaching technology. Committed
to developing a sustainable raw material
base, ITC’s pulpwood is largely sourced from
renewable plantations under its Social and
Farm Forestry Programme, which provides
livelihood opportunities to tribals and
small farmers. Leveraging its experience in
afforestation, ITC embarked on an innovation
to address the food-fibre conflict by creating
an Agro-Forestry model that synergises tree
growing with crop production. This model
ensures both food and wood security and
helps in the conservation of precious natural
resources. ITC’s Agro-Forestry model is
designed to allocate 25% of the land to forestry
and the remaining 75% land is available for
agricultural crops. As a result multi-cropping
is possible throughout the tenure of the tree
life-cycle. In addition, through Agro-Forestry,
the leaf litter increases the carbon content,
and replenishes soil nutrients restoring
fertility.

ITC
embarked on
an innovation to
address the foodfibre conflict by
creating an AgroForestry model
that synergises
tree growing with
crop production.

ITC’s initiative, ‘Wealth Out of Waste’ (WOW),
promotes and facilitates waste paper

21

recycling to help conserve scarce natural
resources and generate employment.

PACKAGING AND PRINTING
BUSINESS
ITC is the largest value-added converter
of paperboard packaging in India. Backed

Agri Business
ITC is today one of India’s leading corporates
in the agricultural sector. One of the largest
exporters of agri products from the country,
ITC sources the finest of Indian Feed
Ingredients, Food Grains, Marine Products,
Processed Fruits and Coffee. The bedrock of

ITC
offers a
comprehensive
product range in
packaging backed
by its packaging
expertise over
decades and
cutting edge
technology
making it truly a
‘one stop shop
for Packaging’.

ITC’s
pioneering
initiatives in
the agricultural
sector have led
to enhancement
of farm
productivity and
empowerment
of farmers.

22

by state-of-the-art technology, world-class
quality and innovation, it provides a variety
of value-added packaging solutions for the
food & beverage, personal care products,
consumer goods industries and so on. The
Business supplies value-added packaging to
ITC’s various FMCG businesses. Its client list
includes several well-known national and
international companies.
The Business has 3 state of the art packaging
factories at Tiruvottiyur near Chennai,
Munger in Bihar, and Haridwar. ITC offers a
comprehensive product range in packaging
backed by its packaging expertise over
decades and cutting edge technology making
it truly a ‘one stop shop for Packaging’. ITC’s
Packaging factory near Chennai is powered
by renewable energy.

ITC’s Agri Business is its strong and enduring
farmer partnerships that have revolutionised
and transformed the rural agricultural sector
through the ‘ITC e-Choupal’, the world’s
largest rural digital infrastructure network.
ITC’s Agri Business bears testimony to the
Company’s commitment to sustainable and
inclusive growth.
Through its value chains, ITC has forged strong
partnerships with farmers. Its pioneering
initiatives in the agricultural sector have led
to enhancement of farm productivity and
empowerment of farmers. Coupled with deep
understanding of agricultural practices and
intensive research, the business continues
to deliver incremental value across the
agricultural value chain.
ITC is also engaged in the production of
Leaf Tobacco. The Business constantly
endeavours to achieve a balance between

economically viable leaf production with
the highest degree of product integrity and
environmental protection. This is achieved by
advocating and educating farmers on the best
practices in integrated crop management.
This includes sensitising rural farmers on how
to reduce agrochemical use, conserving soil
fertility through contemporary technologies,

protecting water resources, improving
quality, yield and farmer returns in tobacco
production, minimising fuel consumption,
promoting afforestation practices and the
development of alternate fuels in curing.

Information
Technology
ITC Infotech, the Company’s wholly owned
subsidiary, is one of the fastest growing midtier IT companies. It provides IT services and
solutions to leading global customers across
140 countries in 5 continents.
ITC Infotech is focused on servicing the BFSI
(Banking, Financial Services & Insurance),
CPG&R (Consumer Packaged Goods & Retail), Life
Sciences, Manufacturing & Engineering Services,
THT (Travel, Hospitality and Transportation) and
Media & Entertainment industries.

ITC
Infotech,
the Company’s
wholly owned
subsidiary, is one
of the fastest
growing mid-tier
IT companies.

23

Innovative
strategies
have been
designed and
implemented to
create sustainable
value chains
linked to ITC’s
businesses that
encompass some
of the most
disadvantaged
sections of
society, especially
those residing
in rural India.
The vitality of
ITC’s winning
brands drive the
competitiveness
of these value
chains.

24

Management
Approach
ITC’s vision to serve larger national priorities
is realised by the strategic approach of
embedding sustainability in its core business
models. Innovative strategies have therefore
been designed and implemented to create
sustainable value chains linked to ITC’s
businesses that encompass some of the most
disadvantaged sections of society, especially
those residing in rural India. The vitality of ITC’s
winning brands drive the competitiveness
of these value chains. At the same time,
these linkages provide unique sources of
competitive advantage to the Company’s
businesses. ITC cognises that with expanding
businesses under a diversified portfolio,
holistic achievement of the Company’s
vision for sustainable development requires

due consideration of environmental and
social impacts within the supply chain. It
will therefore be important to extend ITC’s
Triple Bottom Line approach along the supply
chain to ensure long-term competitiveness
by adopting a balanced approach towards
creation of social & environmental value and
the economic viability of the businesses.
In order to formalise its existing sustainable
procurement process, ITC now has a
Board approved Policy on Responsible
Sourcing which addresses the issues of
labour practices, human rights, bribery,
corruption, occupational health, safety and
the environment. The policy is meant for
Third Party Manufacturers (TPM), service
providers including transporters, suppliers
of agricultural & non-agricultural materials
and capital goods, franchisees, dealers
and distributors collectively referred to

G4-21

as supply chain partners. A simplified
representation of this relationship is
provided below:

integral part of ITC’s supply chain. Please
refer to Social Investments - Mission Sunehra
Kal section in this Report for details of our
relationship with this important part of our
supply chain.

ITC
Business

Leaf
Business

Cigarettes

Farmers
(Agri-raw
materials)

Transporters

Packaging and
Printing

Paperboards and
Speciality Paper

Personal Care
Products

Transporters

Foods
Customers/
Consumers
Other Suppliers
(Other Raw Materials,
Service Providers etc.)

Agri-Business

Education and
Stationery Products

Matches and
Agarbattis
* The above diagram includes material flow only and does not include Lifestyle Retailing Business, ITC Hotels
and ITC Infotech
Indicates Material flow within ITC

As evident from the above representation
of the generic supply chain structure for
ITC businesses, the supply chains of most
of ITC’s businesses are vertically integrated.
Farmers are the key suppliers to majority of
our businesses which are dependent on agricommodities and therefore constitute an

G4-21

The Education and Stationery Products
(ESPB), Matches & Agarbatti and Foods
Businesses have significant Third Party
Manufacturing (TPM) contributions. In line
with our commitment to extend the Triple
Bottom Line approach along our supply chain,
we have started by including the Notebooks

25

manufacturers of ESPB which contributed to
around 90% of the total business of ESPB,
within the Reporting Boundary. The materials
aspects of these exclusive TPMs are included
in this Report. Going forward, they will be
helped in establishing systems to improve
their environmental and social performance.
Also during the year, ATC Limited, an associate
company of ITC group has been brought
within the reporting boundary, where as per
plan, they were supported in implementing
systems and processes to monitor the
material environmental and social aspects in
its manufacturing operations. It is proposed to
bring the 2 TPMs of the Company’s Cigarettes
Business within the reporting boundary
in 2014-15.

Sustainability in
the Agri Supply
Chain
AGRI COMMODITIES

ITC’s
e- Choupal
network ensures
traceability,
identity
preservation of
the produce along
the entire value
chain as well as
product integrity
by leveraging
Information
Technology
and digital
infrastructure that
enhances the
competitiveness
of the agri
value chain.

26

Over the years, the Commodities operations
in Agri-Business Division has been offering
customised solutions by continuously
aligning with the tastes and preferences of
customers. These solutions not only help
customers in enhancing their cost and quality
competitiveness, but also create value for
other partners, especially farmers.
The operations span the entire spectrum of
activities starting from agri-services/ crop
development to risk management, including
sourcing, processing, supply chain, multimodal logistics, stock management, and
customer service. The solutions offered
are a combination of all or some of these
interventions. The solutions also offer the
customers the flexibility in terms of quantity,
timing, as well as packaging solutions for
delivery of the agri-commodities.
The Division has been continuously investing
in strengthening capability through multiple
sourcing models, customised and identity
preserved supply chain infrastructure and
network, processing and warehousing tieups, and technology enabled systems and
processes. The Division also works closely

with farmer groups to develop identified
geographies for certified and organic crops.
These investments coupled with deep
understanding of agriculture, and the reach
of the e-Choupal network, provides the
opportunity to offer a wide range of reliable
and consistent solutions that are efficient
and effective along the entire supply chain.
ITC’s e- Choupal network ensures traceability,
identity preservation of the produce along the
entire value chain as well as product integrity
by leveraging Information Technology and
digital infrastructure that enhances the
competitiveness of the agri value chain.
This has been achieved by empowering
farmers through price discovery, knowledge,
information as well as agricultural best
practices. A hub and spoke model has been
built along with the necessary physical
infrastructure that has enabled multi-level
aggregation. The model also ensures visibility
of the agri-produce along the entire supply
chain to the sourcing and processing units of
the organisation.
Based on the above approach, the Division
sourced over 20 lakhs tonnes of agricommodities covering wheat, soya, coffee,
potato, fruits, barley, maize, rice, and shrimps
from over 20 states to service a range
of customers in India and across several
countries, including leading brand owners
and bulk processors.

LEAF TOBACCO
With challenges of low productivity per unit
of land as well as low wages and increasing
unavailability of farm labour, the agricultural
sector is no exception to India’s problem of
growing social inequality. India is one of the
largest producers and exporters of flue cured
Virginia tobacco which is grown on rain-fed
and residual moisture conditions primarily in
the states of Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh.
These areas are drought prone and at the
same time deprived of adequate irrigation
facilities thereby challenging the sustenance
of agriculture dependant families. ITC
sources tobacco for cigarette manufacturing
from these rain-fed agricultural areas
through auction platforms regulated by the
Tobacco Board. Tobacco gives the farmers in
these states an assured and a comparatively
more remunerative source of income given
the challenges of growing other crops in this
region.
ITC’s Leaf Tobaccco Business lends
support to farmers by educating them
on improved varieties, novel seedling
production methodologies, best practices in
Integrated Crop Management, viz., reducing

agrochemical inputs, conserving soil
fertility through contemporary technologies,
protecting water resources, improving
quality, yield and farmer returns in tobacco
production and minimising fuel consumption.
In order to improve sustainability in the
tobacco supply chain, ITC’s Leaf Tobacco
Business has undertaken a preliminary study
for improving energy usage efficiencies in
tobacco curing by the farmers in its operating
region. Based on the preliminary assessment
results, ITC is now working on the promotion
of sustainable fuel management for tobacco
curing in the supply chain. The Business is
collaborating with the Tobacco Board and
a taskforce has been formed for providing
solutions to the tobacco farming community
on sustainable fuel management. Research
is currently ongoing for development of more
fuel efficient technologies for tobacco curing
e.g. roof insulation of barns, ventilation by
forced convection through the barns, loose
leaf barns, rocket barn etc., that have been
tested to reduce fuel consumption by around
30% on a pilot scale. Based on further trials,
such technologies will be scaled up. With an
objective to develop a self-sustaining model,
the Business has initiated the development
of energy plantations on wastelands as part
of its social investment programmes. These
plantations are expected to cater to the total
fuel requirements for tobacco curing in ITC’s
operating regions within the next 5 to 7 years.
In addition, farmers are encouraged to use
alternate fuels such as coffee husk, biomass
briquettes etc. for tobacco curing with an aim
to achieve sustainable fuel sourcing.

The Road Ahead
ITC will work towards the progressive
implementation of the relevant Board
approved policies on sustainability aspects
along the supply chain through formalisation
of appropriate systems and processes. Each
Business will also develop plans to bring in
their supply chain within the sustainability
performance management system in a
progressive way and efforts will be directed
for continual improvement. Performance on
these aspects will form part of the review by the
Sustainability Compliance Review Committee.

With an
objective to
develop a selfsustaining model,
the Business
has initiated the
development of
energy plantations
on waste lands
as part of its
social investment
programmes.
These plantations
are expected to
cater to the total
fuel requirements
for tobacco curing
in ITC’s operating
regions within
the next 5 to 7
years.

27

ITC has won the prestigious 12th
Businessworld FICCI CSR Award in the
Large Enterprise category. The award
recognises the most socially responsible
Indian corporates in CSR.

Certifications,
Honours
and Awards

The FICCI Outstanding Vision Corporate
Triple Impact Award, presented by the then
Prime Minister, Dr Manmohan Singh (2008).
The FICCI Award for Outstanding
Achievement in Rural and Community
Development, presented by the then Finance
Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee (2010).
Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar received the
Business Person of the Year Award from UK
Trade & Investment (2006).
Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar was awarded
the SAM/SPG Sustainability Leadership
Award in Zurich (2007).

Major Awards Over
the Years
Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar was conferred
the Padma Bhushan by the Government of
India (2011).
Harvard Business Review ranked ITC
Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar as the 7th Best
Performing CEO in the World in its JanuaryFebruary 2013 edition.
Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar was conferred
the Global Leadership Award by the US
India Business Council of the US Chamber
of Commerce (2010).

Harvard
Business
Review ranked
ITC Chairman
Mr Y C Deveshwar
as the 7th Best
Performing CEO
in the World in its
JanuaryFebruary 2013
edition.

28

ITC Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar was
conferred the Business Leader of the
Year Award by the All India Management
Association (AIMA).
ITC was presented the World Business and
Development Award at the historic Rio+20
UN Summit for its Social and Farm Forestry
initiative.
ITC has been presented the AIM Asian
CSR Award by the Asian Forum on
Corporate Social Responsibility (AFCSR),
in recognition of its contribution to
the creation of sustainable livelihoods
and fostering economic growth in rural
communities in India.

The National Award for Excellence in
Corporate Governance from the Institute of
Company Secretaries of India (2007).
ITC was ranked 2nd among top Indian
companies in the first of its kind Standard &
Poor Environmental, Social and Corporate
Governance ratings (2008).
ITC ranked 2nd among top companies in
India and 7th in Asia in the first of its kind
Asian Sustainability Rating released by
CSR Asia (2010).
ITC became the first Indian Company to
gain Membership with WWF-GFTN for
Responsible Forestry (2010).
ITC was ranked the world’s 6th largest
sustainable value creator among consumer
goods companies according to a Report by
Boston Consulting Group (2010).
ITC won the top UNIDO Award at the
International Conference on Sharing
Innovative Agri Business Solutions at Cairo
(2008).
ITC was conferred the Corporate Social
Responsibility Crown Award for Water
Practices from UNESCO and Water Digest
(2008).
The Asian CSR Award for Environmental
Excellence, given by the Asian Institute of
Management (2007).

ITC was the 1st Indian Company and 2nd in
the world to win the Development Gateway
Award for its trail-blazing e-Choupal
initiative (2005).
Inaugural World Business Award by UNDP
for ITC’s e-Choupal initiative (2004).
ITC e-Choupal won the
Challenge Award (2006).

Stockholm

ITC was rated amongst Asia-Pacific’s 50
biggest listed companies in ‘Asia Fab 50’ by
Forbes (2010).
All ITC’s super premium luxury hotels
accorded LEED® Platinum certification,
making ITC Hotels the ‘Greenest Luxury
Hotel Chain in the World’ (2011).
ITC’s Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Units at Bhadrachalam, Bollaram, Kovai
and Tribeni are FSC Chain of Custody
certified (2011).
ITC’s Unit in Bhadrachalam has been
awarded the Forest Stewardship Council
Forest Management (FSC-FM) certification
by the SmartWood Programme of the
Rainforest Alliance (2011).

ITC’s Chief Financial Officer, Mr Rajiv
Tandon, was ranked the ‘Best Overall CFO’
at the fourth edition of the ‘Business TodayYes Bank Best CFO Awards.’ In addition,
Mr Tandon was also declared the winner in
the category of ‘Sustained Wealth Creation
(large companies)’.
ITC Maurya received the National Tourism
Award from the Ministry of Tourism,
Government of India, for the ‘Best Eco
Friendly Hotel’.
ITC’s Factory at Bengaluru was conferred
the Frost & Sullivan Green Manufacturing
Excellence Award (GMEA) 2014 in the
“Overall Leaders” category.
ITC’s
Corporate
Communications
Department received the PRSI (Public
Relations Society of India) Awards in 5
categories and the ABCI (Association of
Business Communication of India) Awards
in 1 category.

The ITC
Green Centre
at Manesar was
awarded the BEE
5 Star rating by
the Bureau of
Energy Efficiency,
Government of
India.

ITC Grand Chola received the green
rating for integrated habitat assessment
by the Energy Resource Institute (TERI)
and Ministry of New & Renewable Energy
(MNRE), Government of India.

Major Awards
2013-14
ITC was ranked 3rd among 40 leading
companies in the Nielsen Corporate Image
Monitor 2013-14, and was featured among
the top 5 most admired companies in India.
ITC was also perceived to be the ‘Company
most active in CSR’ for the third year in a
row.
ITC voted among the top two “Buzziest
Brands” in the “Corporate” category
by “afaqs”, one of the world’s largest
marketing and advertising portals.
The ITC Green Centre at Manesar was
awarded the BEE 5 Star rating by the
Bureau of Energy Efficiency, Government
of India.
ITC Hotels was recognised as the Most
Respected Company in the Hospitality
category by the Business World Magazine.

29

ITC was conferred the Karnataka State
Environment Award for 2012-2013 for its
outstanding contribution in Soil & Moisture
Conservation and Livestock Development
in Mysore.
ITC’s Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Business has been conferred the Green
Product of the Year award at the India
Green Business Summit 2014.
ITC’s Agri Business has bagged the Rural
Marketing Association of India (RMAI)
Flame Award 2013 in the category of
excellence in Brand Promotion.
The Kalyanpura Integrated Watershed
Development
Project
in
Bhilwara,
Rajasthan, won the Project Management
Institute (PMI) award for Project of the Year
– Contribution to the Community.
ITC’s Munger facility was awarded Platinum
certification by the Confederation of Indian
Industries’ Indian Green Building Council
(CII-IGBC).
The Kovai Unit of ITC’s Paperboards and
Specialty Papers Division won the CII
Environmental Best Practices Award 2013
from CII-GBC, Hyderabad, in the category
of Innovative Environmental Project.
ITC’s Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Unit at Bhadrachalam received the Most
Innovative Environmental Project Award
& the Most Useful Project Award at the CII
Environmental Best Practices Awards 2013
from CII-GBC, Hyderabad.
The Tiruvottiyur Unit of ITC’s Packaging
& Printing Business was conferred the

‘Excellent Energy Efficient Unit’ award by
the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII).
The Bhadrachalam Unit of ITC’s Paperboards
& Specialty Papers Business was conferred
the ‘Excellence in Energy Management’
award by the Confederation of Indian
Industry (CII).
ITC’s factory in Bengaluru received the
“Energy Efficient Unit” award in the 14th
National Awards for Excellence in Energy
Management 2013 conferred by the
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII).
ITC’s factory in Bengaluru bagged the
runners-up trophy in the FICCI Water
Award, 2013.
The ITC Master Facility at Manesar, Gurgaon
received the double green rating of Indian
Green Building Council (IGBC) LEED®
Platinum for Core & Shell construction and
the US Green Building Council (USGBC)
Platinum rating for Commercial Interiors.
ITC Rajputana received the Green Building
Awards from the Sanskriti Youva Sanstha.
ITC’s Green Leaf Threshing Project at
Mysore has received the “Gold” rating 2014
from the Indian Green Building Council.
ITC’s WelcomHeritage was awarded the
“Best Heritage Hotel Chain” by the 7th
Today’s Traveller Award 2013.
ITC’s Unit at Chirala was conferred the “Best
Employee Relations Award in the Prakasam
District for maintaining harmonious
industrial relations and providing one of
the best welfare facilities to employees.
ITC’s Unit at Anaparthi won three awards
at the 27th National Convention on Quality
Concepts (NCQC) organised by the Quality
Circle Forum of India.
ITC’s Bhadrachalam Unit garnered the 2nd
place at the State Energy Conservation
Award – instituted by New & Renewable
Energy Development Corporation of A.P.
Ltd. (NREDCAP).
Fiama Di Wills Men clinched its first digital
award in the Web category at the coveted
Indian Digital Media Awards 2013.
ITC’s Unit at Chirala received the
Government of Andhra Pradesh’s Best
Management Award for 2012-13.

30

ITC Hotels has been recognised as No. 1 in
the world in the ‘Sustainability’ category
at the ‘Global Vision Awards’ by Travel +
Leisure Magazine, U.S.
ITC Grand Chola ranked among the TOP 50
hotels of the world in the HOT List 2013,
CondeNast Traveller.
Times Food and Nightlife Awards for
ITC Hotels’ restaurants – Peshawri,
Chandravanshi Pavillion, Jharokha, Dum
Pukht, Dakshin Coastal, Pan Asian, Bukhara,
West View Bar & Grill , ITC Sonar’s Gourmet
Shop - Bakery & Confectionary, Dum Pukht
Jolly Nabobs, EDO and Cubbon Pavilion.
ITC’s Packaging & Printing facility at
Munger received the International Safety
Award from the British Safety Council.
ITC’s Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Business, Kovai Unit, received the CII Southern
Region EHS Excellence Award 2013.
ITC Windsor received CII’s Leadership &
Excellence Award for Environment, Health
and Safety for the Hospitality Industry.
ITC Gardenia also won the National Award
for Excellence in Energy Management
conferred by the Confederation of Indian
Industry (CII).
ITC’s Bengaluru Unit received the
prestigious
“Athyunnatha
Suraksha
Puraskara” from the National Safety
Council, Karnataka Chapter.
ITC’s Munger Facility also received the
“Suraksha Puraskar” from the National
Safety Council of India.
ITC’s Saharanpur Unit received the
“Prashansa Patra” Award by the National
Safety Council of India.
ITC’s Munger Facility received the award
for Excellence in Pollution Control
Management from the Bihar State Pollution
Control Board.
ITC’s Bengaluru Factory received the Best
Practices in Solid Waste Management from
Bengaluru Chamber of Commerce.

EHS Certifications
ISO 14001: Environment Management
Systems
All manufacturing units of ITC, all the major
hotels (except the recently opened ITC
Grand Chola) and the ITC Life Sciences &
Technology Centre at Bengaluru.
OHSAS 18001: Occupational Health &
Safety Management Systems
All the manufacturing units of ITC
SA 8000: Social Accountability
Leaf processing plants at Chirala and
Anaparti and Mysore, ITC’s factory at
Kolkata, Surya Nepal’s Simra Unit,
Packaging and Printing Unit at Tiruvottiyur
and ITC Infotech Bengaluru.
Food Safety: ISO 22000/HACCP Food
Safety Management System
ITC Maurya, ITC Mughal, ITC Maratha, ITC
Grand Central, ITC Sonar, ITC Windsor, ITC
Kakatiya, ITC Rajputana, WelcomHotel
New Delhi and My Fortune Chennai and
Foods Units in Haridwar and Pune.
LEED® Platinum Rating by US Green
Building Council – Existing Building
category
Hotels: ITC Maurya, ITC Windsor, ITC
Maratha, ITC Grand Central, ITC Mughal,
ITC Sonar, ITC Kakatiya and ITC Rajputana.
LEED® Platinum Rating by Indian Green
Building Council – New Construction category
ITC Gardenia & ITC Grand Chola
LEED® Platinum Rating by Indian Green
Building Council – Green
Factory Building
ITC’s Units at Saharanpur,
Bengaluru, Munger and
Pune
Green
Rating
for
Integrated
Habitat
Assessment (GRIHA)
5 star rating for ITC Grand
Chola

ITC Windsor received an overall 4 star
rating for Outstanding Leadership and
Excellence in EHS across all industries
such as Cement, Information Technology
and Manufacturing.

31

genuinely represent the views of their
constituents, and can be relied upon
to faithfully communicate the results
of the engagements with ITC, back to
their constituents.
Stakeholders’ identification is guided by the
attributes of stakeholders such as:

DEPENDENCY
Groups or individuals who are directly or
indirectly dependent on the organisation’s
activities, products or services and
associated performance, or whom
the organisation is dependent on for
operations e.g. shareholders, employees,
farmers, suppliers, service providers and
local communities.

RESPONSIBILITY

ITC’s
approach
to stakeholder
engagement
is based on the
long term stable
relationships
that it has
fostered with key
stakeholders such
as shareholders,
farmers,
customers,
suppliers,
employees, local
communities,
regulatory
bodies and
media.

32

In line with ITC’s philosophy of creating
enduring value for all its stakeholders,
ITC has adopted a structured approach to
building partnerships in sustainable business
practices. ITC’s approach to stakeholder
engagement is based on the long term stable
relationships that it has fostered with key
stakeholders such as shareholders, farmers,
customers, suppliers, employees, local
communities, regulatory bodies, media etc.
Recognising that stakeholder engagement is
an integral part of partnership building, ITC
has endeavoured to institutionalise these
existing relationships through a formal
process that includes:
Identification of key stakeholders
Consultation with the key stakeholders

Groups or individuals to whom the
organisation has, or potentially envisaged
to have, legal, commercial, operational
or ethical responsibilities e.g. customers;
providers of financial capital.

IMMEDIACY
Groups or individuals who need immediate
attention
from
the
organisation
with regard to economic, social or
environmental issues.

INFLUENCE
Groups and individuals who can have impact
on the organisation’s or a stakeholder’s
strategic or operational decision-making
e.g. Providers of financial capital;
Government and Regulatory Authorities.
Therefore, broadly the key stakeholders
identified by ITC include,

Identification and prioritisation of concerns
and needs

Providers of financial capital

Addressing the prioritised concerns and needs
in a consistent and transparent manner

Employees

ITC identifies and profiles stakeholder
groups as well as individual stakeholder
representatives who are directly/indirectly
impacted by its business activities as well
as those who can directly or indirectly exert
influence on its business activities. While
selecting
stakeholder
representatives,
attempts are made to ensure that they

Customers

Supply chain members
Farmers
Government and Regulatory Authorities
Local Communities
Civil society
Media

G4-21, G4-24, G4-25, G4-26

For each of these identified key stakeholders,
the context for stakeholder consultation
is established through creation of generic
awareness about the organisation’s activities
and immediate future plans through press
releases, website, advertisements & other
public presentations and social networking.
Stakeholder consultation at ITC is a continual
process both at the business as well as at
the corporate level, depending on the target
stakeholder being engaged with. Targeted
consultation processes are conducted on a
regular basis, giving due weightage to each
stakeholder’s nature of engagement with
the organisation. The consultative process
includes the following:

Stakeholder
consultation at
ITC is a continual
process both at
the business as
well as at the
corporate level,
depending on the
target stakeholder
being engaged
with.

Existing relationship with the organisation
e.g. close relationship like that of
the employees against more distant
international civil society organisations,
formal relationships like that with
shareholders against more informal
relationships with local communities, etc.
Reliance on the organisation, which
would necessitate that the stakeholder
group should be able to express its views
independently and freely without any
fear of negative influence of its existing
relationship with the organisation. This is
especially applicable in the context of supply
chain members who have direct business
relationships with the organisation;
Willingness to engage;

Level of influence as applicable in cases of
civil society, media and regulatory authorities
The following diagram highlights the
consultation mechanisms with these
respective stakeholders, together with key
concerns, requirements and expectations
identified through them, and ITC’s response.

ITC

PROVIDERS
OF
FINANCIAL
CAPITAL

GOVERNMENT
AND
REGULATORY
AUTHORITIES
FARMERS

CIVIL
SOCIETY

G4-21, G4-24, G4-25, G4-26

SUPPLY
CHAIN
PARTNERS
CUSTOMERS

LOCAL
COMMUNITIES

EMPLOYEES
MEDIA

33

PROVIDERS OF FINANCIAL CAPITAL

METHOD OF ENGAGEMENT
Annual General Meeting
with the Board of Directors
being present
Exclusive section in Corporate
Website on ‘Shareholder Value’
which serves to inform and
service shareholders

KEY CONCERNS, NEEDS,
EXPECTATIONS OF STAKEHOLDERS
Continued profitability and
growth of the organisation

ITC’S RESPONSE

Transparent and
effective communications

Consistent growth and
profitability; sustainable
development initiatives
integrated with business
strategies

Investor servicing

Uninterrupted dividends
Dissemination of business
performance, vision and outlook
through annual reports, quarterly
financial results, press releases
and corporate website
www.itcportal.com.

An exclusive
e-mail id: isc@itc.in for direct
interaction with shareholders
Shareholder Satisfaction Survey

Services through Investor
Services Centre

CUSTOMERS

METHOD OF ENGAGEMENT

KEY CONCERNS, NEEDS,
EXPECTATIONS OF STAKEHOLDERS

Market surveys

Fair and competitive pricing

Personal contacts/visits

Product/service quality

Personalised lifestyle privilege
programme

Adequate information on
products

Customer satisfaction surveys

Product/ service availability

Joint development and
improvement projects

Timely delivery of product/service

Key account management
Multi-level interfaces at
dealer-customer-end user

Maintenance of privacy/
confidentiality

ITC’S RESPONSE
Robust Quality Assurance
systems, supported by process
innovations, adoption of green
technology, lean management,
six sigma and TPM, for providing
high quality cost competitive
products and services
Significant investments in R&D to
develop newer products/variants
Timely delivery of quality
products/services at
competitive prices
Transparent disclosure of product
information in line with statutory/
regulatory requirements
Continuous improvement on
product/service quality based on
customer feedback

34

G4-21, G4-27

EMPLOYEES

METHOD OF ENGAGEMENT

KEY CONCERNS, NEEDS,
EXPECTATIONS OF STAKEHOLDERS

Induction programmes/Training
workshops

Personal development
and growth

Individual
performance appraisal

Work culture that ensures
high performance level

Employee engagement survey

World class learning experience

Grievance handling processes

Caring and empowering work
environment

ITC’S RESPONSE
Fostering a culture that rewards
performance, continuous
learning, collaboration and
capacity development across
the organisation to be futureready and effectively meet
the challenges posed by ever
changing market realities
Ensuring a safe and healthy
working environment coupled
with a target of zero accidents at
workplace

Work place safety
Grievance resolution
Competitive compensation
Career

Structured grievance handling
process for addressing employee
concerns and enabling
grievances, if any, to be resolved
in a just and equitable manner
ITC’s remuneration strategy
recognises performance and
meritocracy, whilst remaining
competitive and sustainable
Development of systems and
procedures for implementation
of Board approved policies
on Freedom of Association,
Diversity and Equal Opportunity,
Prohibition of Child Labour,
Prevention of Forced Labour at
the Workplace etc.

SUPPLY CHAIN PARTNERS

METHOD OF ENGAGEMENT

KEY CONCERNS, NEEDS,
EXPECTATIONS OF STAKEHOLDERS

Manufacturers’ Meet

Knowledge and infrastructure
support

G4-21, G4-27

ITC’S RESPONSE
Policies, processes and best
practices that ensure that
procurement activity is conducted
in an open, transparent and nondiscriminatory manner

35

SUPPLY CHAIN PARTNERS

METHOD OF ENGAGEMENT

KEY CONCERNS, NEEDS,
EXPECTATIONS OF STAKEHOLDERS

Vendor Meets

Regular communication and
updates on business plans

Competitive pricing

Inclusion of local medium and
small scale enterprises in vendor
base

Timely payment and changes
or cancellation of orders in line
with terms and conditions agreed
upon

Competency development of
local vendors

Timely supply of products to
dealers, retailers etc.

Stability/tenure of relationship

Avoidance of sole sourcing (to the
extent possible) and retroactive
contracting

Pre-agreement negotiations
Agreements for all procurement
activities

ITC’S RESPONSE

Ordering and Payment Routines
Purchasing prices
Changes or cancellation of orders
Transparency

Sourcing of specialised
production machinery across
large, medium and small scale
sectors. Utility machinery such
as boilers, generator sets, airconditioning and refrigeration
machinery and electrical &
electronic systems are sourced
largely from Indian or India based
suppliers. Competent service
providers from India carry out
construction and renovation of
new manufacturing facilities,
hotels, warehouses and offices
Strong processes to identify/
develop and qualify vendors on
the basis of supply assurance,
innovation quotient, product
quality and value for money
considerations
Testing of contracts for
regulatory compliance and
vendor deliverables cognising for
environmental, health and safety
legislation

36

G4-21, G4-27

SUPPLY CHAIN PARTNERS

METHOD OF ENGAGEMENT

KEY CONCERNS, NEEDS,
EXPECTATIONS OF STAKEHOLDERS

ITC’S RESPONSE
Where appropriate, provision of
technical support and managerial
inputs to vendors to enable them
to move in tandem with the
Company’s business plans. The
Company also supports several
vocational training initiatives in
areas close to its operations
Setting up sourcing centres
in rural India for several of
its product categories, both
directly and in collaboration
with various State agencies and
NGOs to assist in the creation of
sustainable livelihoods

FARMERS

METHOD OF ENGAGEMENT

KEY CONCERNS, NEEDS,
EXPECTATIONS OF STAKEHOLDERS

Regular formal/
informal talks

Inputs on agricultural
best practices

Agreements for all procurement
activities

Know-how on
improvement of productivity
and profitability

e-Choupal and Choupal
Pradarshan Khets
(demonstration farms)

Consistent increase in income
generation from ITC
Capacity development
for further investment

ITC’S RESPONSE
Co-creation of the e-Choupal
initiative with farmers to provide
information and knowhow on
agricultural best practices,
transmission of market signals,
transparent discovery
of prices, timely and relevant
weather information, access
to quality inputs, and most
importantly, efficient market
access
Working closely with
farmers to enhance agri
and farm productivity through
demonstration farms and
customised extension services
Creation of physical
infrastructure in the
form of integrated
rural services hubs

G4-21, G4-27

37

FARMERS

METHOD OF ENGAGEMENT

KEY CONCERNS, NEEDS,
EXPECTATIONS OF STAKEHOLDERS

ITC’S RESPONSE
Continuous engagement with
policy makers for enabling a
balanced and pragmatic policy
framework that not only removes
restrictive conditions on the efficient
functioning of agri businesses but
also facilitates the establishment of
market-based institutions that can
raise agricultural productivity and
optimise transaction costs across the
value chain
Integrated Watershed Management
Initiative and Social and Farm
Forestry Programmes (please refer
to Social Investments - Mission
Sunehra Kal section in this Report
for further details)

GOVERNMENT AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES

METHOD OF ENGAGEMENT
Representations on policy issues
through industry associations
and other bodies
Participation in policy advocacy
discussions at various forums

KEY CONCERNS, NEEDS,
EXPECTATIONS OF STAKEHOLDERS
Regulatory compliance
Tax Revenues
Materials & Energy Efficiency,
Recycling and Efficient Waste
Management
Water Conservation
Post-consumer waste
management
Transparency in disclosures
Employment generation

38

ITC’S RESPONSE
At the Corporate level, association
with CII, FICCI and other industry
bodies to engage with the policy
makers in Government and
Regulatory Authorities and with
the CII-ITC Centre of Excellence
for Sustainable Development
to promote thought leadership,
recognise sustainability champions
and enhance awareness as well
as build capacity on issues related
to sustainable development and
inclusive growth
Consistent efforts towards creation
of positive environmental impacts
aligned with National Action Plan
on Climate Change

G4-21, G4-27

GOVERNMENT AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES

METHOD OF ENGAGEMENT

KEY CONCERNS, NEEDS,
EXPECTATIONS OF STAKEHOLDERS

ITC’S RESPONSE
Co-ordinated initiatives to
manage post-consumer waste
Development of systems and
procedures for implementation of
Board approved policies on Life
Cycle Sustainability, Responsible
Sourcing, Environment, Health
and Safety, Responsible Advocacy

LOCAL COMMUNITIES

METHOD OF ENGAGEMENT
Community needs assessment
activities undertaken in
collaboration with independent
parties/Civil Society
organisations

KEY CONCERNS, NEEDS,
EXPECTATIONS OF STAKEHOLDERS
Community development
programmes based on local
communities’ needs
Grievance redressal process

Participation in village functions
Environmental pollution
Public hearings during
greenfield/expansion projects
Assessment of direct and
indirect impacts of ITC’s social
investments on communities

ITC’S RESPONSE
Forging a long and enduring
partnership with rural communities
through ITC’s agri businesses and
CSR programmes
Village-level institutional
mechanisms which help transform
rural communities into vibrant
economic organisations and
empower stakeholders with
enhanced livelihoods (please refer to
Social Investments - Mission Sunehra
Kal section in this Report for further
details on creation of sustainable
livelihoods)
Development of systems and
procedures for implementation
of Board approved policy on
Stakeholder Engagement
Robust environmental management
systems in accordance with
international standards to ensure
pollution prevention at all ITC Units,
(please refer details in Environmental
Performance section in this Report)

G4-21, G4-27

39

CIVIL SOCIETY

METHOD OF ENGAGEMENT
Partnership in implementation of
CSR Programmes under
Mission Sunehra Kal
Discussions on Community Issues
with Civil Society Organisations

KEY CONCERNS, NEEDS,
EXPECTATIONS OF STAKEHOLDERS
Financial support for community
development programmes
Managerial support
Environmental pollution
prevention
Safe products and services
Responsible Corporate
Citizenship

ITC’S RESPONSE
Creation of sustainable livelihoods
under Mission Sunehra Kal
programmes
Strict compliance to legal norms
related to safety aspects of products
and services
Robust environmental management
systems in accordance with
international standards to ensure
pollution prevention at all ITC units,
(please refer details in Environmental
Performance section in this Report)

MEDIA

METHOD OF ENGAGEMENT
Advertisements/Promotions
Press Conferences/Press
Releases

KEY CONCERNS, NEEDS,
EXPECTATIONS OF STAKEHOLDERS
Transparent and accurate
disclosure to stakeholders
Responsible Corporate
Citizenship

Interviews with Senior Managers

ITC’S RESPONSE
Transparent disclosure of
Triple Bottom-Line performance
through Business Responsibility
Report and Sustainability Report
published annually
Consistent sustainable
development initiatives
Promotion of products

During the process of stakeholder
engagement, ITC also identifies the degree
of sensitivity of a particular concern or
expectation. The sensitivity of an issue to a
stakeholder, in terms of high/ low importance
forms the basis of inputs provided for the
materiality analysis of the organisation to the
extent feasible. (Please refer to the Materiality
Matrix explained in the subsequent section).
ITC’s engagement practices with the different
identified stakeholders are now being
formalised in line with the Board approved

40

Policy on Stakeholder Engagement. In line
with this Policy, ITC’s stakeholder engagement
process is thus being strengthened to ensure,
A two-way arrangement to exchange views
and information and to address relevant
issues
Transparency and accountability
Monitoring and tracking those who have been
consulted and the key concerns expressed
Timely reporting back to those consulted,
with clarifications on ITC’s action plan

G4-21, G4-26, G4-27

Periodic review of actions taken
Periodic redressal of key concerns
Continued integration with ITC’s materiality
analysis, business operations and social
development initiatives as far as feasible.

Materiality Analysis
ITC’s materiality analysis is based upon the
following three pronged approach:-

1. IDENTIFICATION OF 			
	 MATERIAL ASPECTS
For each GRI-G4 defined aspect, ITC
assessed its relevance in terms of the
boundary of the impacts. In addition to the
GRI-G4 defined aspects, ITC also cognised
for business sector specific topics based
on GRI Sustainability Topics for Sectors.
Each of ITC’s businesses evaluated the
applicability of an aspect for the business
and also for the key stakeholders of that
business. For each business, the result was
a list of material aspects considering the
significance to the business and a matrix
of aspects identified to be material for its
key stakeholders.

2. PRIORITISATION
In order to prioritise the material aspects
so identified, each ITC business further
assessed the degree of importance

for each material aspect to its key
stakeholders and itself.
The analysis of high or low importance of a
particular aspect for a stakeholder group
included evaluation of the stakeholder’s
perception of ITC’s impact with respect to that
material aspect and also expectations of the
group regarding ITC’s action and response
against the impact. The key concerns,
needs and expectations of stakeholders
identified through past as well as on-going
engagement constituted the basis of this
evaluation (as detailed in pages 34-40).
On the other hand, the degree of
significance of a material aspect to a
particular ITC business was assessed
based on ITC’s Corporate Strategies,
policies and most importantly risks and
opportunities for the business.
Final aggregation of the degree of
importance of a material aspect to the key
stakeholders of businesses and also level
of significance to the business was done
at the Corporate level in order to arrive at
the materiality matrix.
The materiality matrix also facilitated
ITC in designing the report content so
as to provide a reasonable and balanced
picture of the organisation’s Triple Bottom
Line impacts and its performance.

3. VALIDATION
Illustrated below is the structure of review
followed for validation of the materiality
analysis at ITC:

Final Review and Approval by Sustainability
Compliance Review Committee
Review by
Various
Corporate
Functions
Corporate Level Aggregation of Material Aspects
by Corporate EHS

Business Specific Material Aspects and Mapping
of Impacted Internal and External Stakeholders

G4-21, G4-18, G4-26

41

’s
ITC
f
eo
nc
a
c
ifi
gn
i
gS
in
s
ea
cr
n
I

Economic

42

s
ct
pa
Im
ial
c
o
dS
n
l, a
ta
n
e
nm
o
vir
En
,
ic
om
n
o
Ec

Environmental

Social

Environmental & Social

G4-19

Disclosure on Material Aspects

Sl. No.

Material Aspects

Details available in Sections

1

Economic Performance

Economic Performance

2

Sustainable Livelihoods

Social Investments
- Mission Sunehra Kal

3

Procurement from Local Suppliers

Economic Performance

Economic Performance

Energy
4

Climate Change

Air Emissions
Water Management
Resource Conservation

5

Material Usage Efficiency

6

Product Packaging

7

Transportation

8

Sustainable Forest Management

9

Sustainable Supply Chain

Supply Chain

10

Statutory Compliance

Product Responsibility

11

Employment

Labour Practices and Decent Work

12

Learning and Development

Labour Practices and Decent Work

13

Labour Management Relations

Labour Practices and Decent Work

14

Human Rights

Human Rights Significant
Investments

15

Local Community Development

Raw Materials
Product Responsibility
Resource Conservation
Energy
Air Emissions
Raw Materials
Biodiversity

Economic Performance
Social Investments- Mission
Sunehra Kal
Economic Performance
16

Social Infrastructure

Social Investments- Mission
Sunehra Kal

17

Anti-corruption

Governance Structure

18

Public Policy Advocacy

Responsible Advocacy

19

Employee/ Customer Health and Safety

20

Product Labelling

Product Responsibility

21

Marketing Communication

Product Responsibility

22

Customer Privacy

Product Responsibility

Occupational Health and Safety
Product Responsibility

43

Sustainability Risk
Portfolio
A
business
wise
identification
of
sustainability risks has been carried out
across various sectors in which ITC operates.
This was based on reviews of various relevant
publications, inputs provided by stakeholders
and consultation with domain expert
agencies. Sustainability challenges for ITC
can be classified into two broad categories
– those that are influenced by global events,
and challenges that are unique to developing
nations like India. It becomes essential to
understand in this context that while India
mirrors many of the global challenges, issues
like poverty, social inequities, unemployment
and environmental degradation assume
even more acute and multi-dimensional
characteristics in India.

44

Global Challenges
The sustainability agenda of developed
nations is quite naturally shaped by events
that have had the largest impact on them.
These include the recent financial meltdown,
job losses in the manufacturing sector
and a looming demographic crisis due to
an aging population.
It is also well acknowledged that challenges
like climate change and global warming
are affecting the entire planet. However
the anticipated and real impacts for the
developed world and developing countries
are vastly different, both in scale and
scope. These differences are multi-layered
and multi-faceted given the dimensions
of the challenges and the socio-economic
environment
prevailing
in
different
countries. Given this context, countries like

India while cognising for the larger global
challenges, will have to shape their own
sustainability agenda with focus on specific
issues that have a direct impact on the Indian
society at large.

The Indian Context

the emerging market dynamics and the socioeconomic environment. Of equal concern
is India’s continued downward slide on the
Human Development Index and priority must
be provided to reducing child and mother
mortality, improving access to sanitation
and quality education and reducing the
inequalities of opportunity to enable people
to lead a decent life.

In India, these social and environmental
challenges are even more daunting. Even
though India recently displaced Japan to
become the world’s third largest economy
in terms of Purchasing Power Parity (PPP),
a third of the world’s poor still live in India,
according to a 2013 UN Report. Global
challenges on the social front assume even
greater significance in India which is home to
17% of the world’s population, with only 2.4%
of the world’s land share. India is already
facing challenges of overpopulation and
lack of proper education as well as a paucity
of employment opportunities for the large
population of youth that is now potentially
part of India’s demographic dividend. The
need of the hour is an enabling policy
framework that supports the expansion of
employment opportunities and cognises for

On the environmental front, the latest report
by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) projects a large reduction in
wheat yields in the Indo-Gangetic Plains.
The report goes on to forecast a disruption
of livelihoods, risk to terrestrial and marine
ecosystems and risks of mortality, morbidity,
and other harms during periods of extreme
heat. In addition, factors like water scarcity,
pollution of water sources, top soil loss,
reduction in forest cover, among others,
will negatively impact the already marginal
existence of millions, especially in rural
India. Unless these issues are tackled on
an urgent footing, India may well become a
powder keg of social unrest that will impact
its long-term prospects as a country with
immense potential for large-scale economic,
social and environmental growth.

Countries
like India
while cognising
for the larger
global challenges,
will have to
shape their own
sustainability
agenda with focus
on specific issues
that have a direct
impact on the
Indian society
at large.

45

Taxation and Regulation–Cigarettes
India’s Unique Pattern of Tobacco Consumption
India has a unique pattern of tobacco consumption where the share of legal cigarettes
in overall tobacco consumption is below 12%. The balance of tobacco consumption is
represented by a host of traditional products such as various forms of chewing tobacco,
bidis etc. As a result, India has the lowest per capita consumption of cigarettes in the world.
While India accounts for over 17% of world population, it has a miniscule share of only 1.8%
of global cigarette consumption but constitutes nearly 84% of the global consumption of
smokeless tobacco.
India’s tobacco control policies, however, are incompatible with its unique pattern of
consumption as they have been dictated by a Western model of tobacco consumption,
which is urban centric and where cigarettes represent over 90% of tobacco consumption.
The demand for cigarettes in India is highly price elastic and this is borne out by the fact
that tobacco consumption in the form of legal cigarettes declined from 86 million kg. in
1981-82 to 68 million kg. in 2013-14 even as total tobacco consumption in the country
increased from 406 million kg. in 1981-82 to 577 million kg. in 2013-14 during the same
period. Thus, while overall tobacco consumption is increasing in India, the share of legal
cigarettes in overall tobacco consumption has declined from 21% to below 12%.
High Rates of Taxation
The Cigarette industry had to contend with a steep increase in Excise Duty for two years in
succession along with discriminatory and punitive increases in Value Added Tax (VAT) rates
by some States. Such tax increases not only undermine the legal domestic cigarette industry
and sub-optimise revenue potential from this sector but also fail to achieve the objective of
tobacco control in the country.
According to various independent reports, there is a high degree of dual consumption with a
significant number of cigarette consumers in India also consuming other forms of tobacco.
High incidence of taxation and a discriminatory regulatory regime on cigarettes have, over
the years, led to a significant shift in tobacco consumption to cheaper and revenue inefficient
forms like bidis, chewing tobacco etc.
Illicit Trade
The policy of high taxation narrowly focussed on cigarettes also led to the rapid growth of illegal
cigarettes in India. According to various studies, India is the 5th largest illicit cigarette market
in the world. This has resulted in a significant revenue loss for the government, estimated by
FICCI at around ` 6,000 crores. The size of the illegal industry in India, comprising smuggled
foreign and domestic tax-evaded cigarettes, is currently estimated at 24.3 billion sticks per
annum representing 19% of the overall cigarette market.
As per various international studies, illegal tobacco trade ranks among the top three organised
criminal activities in the world.
High taxes on domestic cigarettes have led to an increasing demand for cheaper tax-evaded
cigarettes. Therefore there is an urgent need for an equitable and balanced tax regime to
enhance the revenue potential of tobacco and discourage the growing illicit trade. This can
only be done by providing tax stability on cigarettes, while simultaneously widening the
tobacco tax base.

ITC’s Initiatives
ITC will continue to engage with policy makers through industry associations for a balanced
regulatory and fiscal framework for tobacco, equitable and harmonious VAT rates across
States and implementation of a uniform GST rate.

46

It has been ITC’s strategic intent to create multiple drivers of growth by building a
portfolio of world-class businesses in Fast Moving Consumer Goods, Paperboards, Paper
and Packaging, Agri Business, Hotels and Information Technology, leveraging enterprise
strengths such as consumer insights, innovative product development, brand building,
state-of-the-art manufacturing, efficient supply chain and distribution infrastructure and
sustained investments in R&D.

Impact on Livelihoods of Farmers
The Tobacco industry provides direct and indirect employment to 38 million people in India,
primarily in the agriculture sector.
Tobacco continues to be a viable and remunerative crop for farmers in the regions where
this crop is grown, given the prevailing agro-climatic nature and soil conditions of these
regions. It gives farmers an assured income and good institutional support is also available
for this crop.
The disproportionately high taxation on cigarettes fuels transborder smuggling, leading to
a reduction in domestic demand and impacts the market price for the farm produce. This
adversely impacts the livelihood of farmers in general and the dependent community in
particular. Tobacco farmers are important constituents of the tobacco industry.
Increasing volumes of smuggled foreign cigarettes also result in the decline in demand
for Indian tobaccos since these cigarettes do not use any Indian tobaccos. On the other
hand, illegal cigarettes produced in India use tobaccos of dubious and inferior quality.
Consequently, the proliferation of duty evaded cigarettes not only has an adverse impact on
demand for high-quality Indian tobaccos but also a cascading impact on incomes of Indian
farmers, long term viability of the legal cigarette industry as well as Government revenues.

Challenges Impacting Agriculture and Agri Business
Agriculture in India engages around 50 per cent of the country’s workforce and supports
the livelihoods of 75 per cent of the population living below the poverty line.
The sector consumes 80 per cent of the nation’s fresh water resources, a quarter of the total
electricity and more than 70 per cent of central government subsidies.
However, it accounts for just about 14 per cent of GDP. Woefully therefore, the farmer’s per
capita income is less than one-fifth of the rest of the country’s average.
Such low incomes are a result of a deteriorating natural resource base, disconnected
value chains, fragmented landholdings, weak infrastructure, inadequate knowledge
and multiple intermediaries.
In addition, around 55% of India’s total sown area meets its requirements from rainwater
alone. This assumes importance in the face of environmental challenges of erratic rainfall
leading to drought and floods. A majority of the farmers are hence trapped in a vicious cycle
of low productivity and low investments.
A long-term view of tackling these issues entails a mosaic of alternative solutions at the
policy level, which address the issue in the short, medium and long terms. These measures
will also ensure larger private participation and investments leading to a large-scale revival
of this sector.
Constraints like non-implementation of the ‘Model APMC’ Act recommended by the Centre
leads to multiple levels of transportation, handling expenses, and commissions of various
agents. This essentially adds nearly 20% cost, through non-value-adding activities. The
Model Act facilitates a direct interface between farmers and agri businesses and helps in
reducing transaction costs by allowing alternative marketing models to co-exist, including
providing farmers with the freedom to sell at the farm gate.

ITC’s
strategic
intent is to
create multiple
drivers of growth
by building a
portfolio of worldclass businesses
in Fast Moving
Consumer Goods,
Paperboards,
Paper and
Packaging, Agri
Business, Hotels
and Information
Technology,
leveraging
enterprise
strengths such as
consumer insights,
innovative product
development,
brand building,
state-of-the-art
manufacturing,
efficient supply
chain and
distribution
infrastructure
and sustained
investments in
R&D.

47

Challenges Impacting Agriculture and Agri Business
Anywhere from 5% to 40% of food is wasted along the chain, depending on the inherent
perishability of the crop and the season. It is possible to reduce this kind of wastage through
methods to determine future prices and align production accordingly. Market instruments
must therefore empower the farmers to produce as per tomorrow’s demand, rather than be
guided by yesterday’s prices that results in wastages due to supply-demand imbalances.
This is further aggravated by limitations that are imposed by the Forward Contracts
(Regulation) Act. While it is acknowledged that strong regulation is necessary to curb
excessive speculation, the Act doesn’t allow sufficient flexibility for genuine players and
deprives them of critical risk management tools, such as options. Options assure farmers of
a minimum price at the time of sowing itself, based on the future projections simulated by
a market consensus. This aligns the production volumes to the future demand conditions
and minimises the shortages as well as avoidable wastages.
Considerable investment is also required to build infrastructure like climate-controlled
storages and transport facilities to prevent wastage. The private sector certainly has the
capacity to invest and add value to such infrastructure. However, regulations like the
Essential Commodities Act (ECA), which impose stock limits and curb movements from
time to time, create uncertainty in business viability, acting as a huge deterrent to such
long-term investments.

It is
essential
to facilitate
value-addition
to farm produce,
especially food, by
way of processing
on a largescale. This will
enable farmers
to cash in on the
consumption
dividend offered
by today’s
quality-conscious,
conveniencepreferring, varietyseeking, and
safety-concerned
consumers.

48

It is also essential to facilitate value-addition to farm produce, especially food, by way
of processing on a large-scale. This will enable farmers to cash in on the consumption
dividend offered by today’s quality-conscious, convenience-preferring, variety-seeking,
and safety-concerned consumers.
Given that a large part of India’s total sown area meets its requirements from rainwater
alone, it is imperative to invest in a wide spectrum of technology interventions that will
make agriculture climate and weather proof. These include introduction of speciallydeveloped varieties of seeds that withstand extreme weather, diverse soil conditions
and various biotic stresses. In addition, scientific practices like precision farming,
micro-irrigation, watershed development and power-efficient farm mechanisation need
proliferation through focussed incentivisation.
Solutions like crop and weather insurance are also essential to whet the risk-taking
capability of the farmer, who can then invest to step up productivity, participate more
effectively in agricultural value chains and garner a larger share of consumer spends.

ITC operates across the agri value chain of 13 crops and is present in 17 states with substantial
investments in resource intensive models that entail heavy capital infrastructure. These agri
value chains that have empowered over 4 million farmers have been severely constrained
by such restrictive regulations that do not distinguish between genuine agri businesses
and unscrupulous hoarders.
Policy reforms also need to encourage large-scale investments by the private sector, which
can provide a much needed boost to this sector.
There is also need for an enabling policy framework that boosts the provision of rural
infrastructure so that wastage can be eliminated and farmers can receive better returns.

ITC’s Initiatives
ITC has empowered farmers and forged strong relationships with rural communities to
enable sustainable sourcing solutions for over several decades. Recognising that poverty
in rural India is primarily a result of the poor capacity of farmers in terms of lack of access
to knowledge, information, price discovery, quality agricultural inputs and markets, the
Company has devised unique models for agri sourcing that not only support sustainable
agriculture but also contribute to substantial livelihood creation for inclusive development.
In addition, ITC’s Social Investments Programmes, including integrated watershed
development, support the adoption of sustainable agricultural practices.
ITC’s e-Choupal network, which leverages information technology to empower farmers,
is a rich repertoire of agri-based interventions and not only addresses the core needs
of farmers in terms of infrastructure, connectivity, price discovery and market access,
but also provides a significant boost to farm productivity through extension services
and research-based agri-inputs. Initiatives like the ‘Choupal Pradarshan Khet’ bring
suitable agricultural best practices to farmers and have demonstrated significant
productivity gains. These interventions have helped transform village communities
into vibrant economic organisations by enhancing incomes and co-creating markets.
ITC’s e-Choupals serve 40,000 villages and 4 million farmers, making it the world’s largest
rural digital infrastructure.
ITC will continue to engage with policy makers through industry associations, organisations
and other appropriate forums for enabling a balanced and pragmatic policy framework that
not only removes restrictive conditions on the efficient functioning of agri businesses but
also facilitates the establishment of market-based institutions that can raise agricultural
productivity and optimise transaction costs across the value chain.

Recognising
that poverty
in rural India
is primarily a
result of the
poor capacity of
farmers in terms
of lack of access
to knowledge,
information, price
discovery, quality
agricultural inputs
and markets, the
Company has
devised unique
models for agri
sourcing that
not only support
sustainable
agriculture but
also contribute
to substantial
livelihood creation
for inclusive
development.

Cimate Change and Environmental Degradation
The race for unbridled economic growth has left a planet seriously depleted of
environmental resources.
The world’s ecological footprint suggests that consumption of natural resources every year
will be far more than the earth’s capacity to regenerate.
With increasing population, people will have access to limited resources which will be far
less than what was available in 1950.
The impact of climate change is manifest in the changed weather patterns and increasing
frequency of extreme weather conditions. This affects agricultural production and severely
impacts the livelihoods of farmers. Given that several of ITC’s businesses are dependent
on agricultural inputs, climate change and global warming have important ramifications
for the Company and some of its major stakeholders – the farmers and communities
in rural India.

49

ITC’s Initiatives
ITC has adopted the following strategies for climate change mitigation:
1.	Identify and evaluate climate change risks for each business.
2.	Reduce the environmental impact of our processes, products and services and work
towards creating a positive environmental footprint.
Adopt a low-carbon growth path through reduction in specific energy consumption and
enhancing use of renewable energy sources.
Enlarge our Carbon Positive footprint through increased carbon sequestration by expanding
forestry projects in wastelands.
Reduce specific water consumption and augment rainwater harvesting activities both on
site and off site at watershed catchment areas.
Work towards minimising waste generation, maximising reuse & recycling and using
external post-consumer waste as raw material in our units.

Resource
efficiency is
integrated into
product and
process design
and is addressed
in the creation
of physical
infrastructure,
the operations
phase, logistics
and waste
management.

50

Create sustainable livelihoods and promote sustainable agricultural practices.
Life Cycle Assessment studies have been carried out for different products to understand
the impact across the value chain. Resource efficiency is integrated into product and
process design and is addressed in the creation of physical infrastructure, the operations
phase, logistics and waste management.
The adoption of these strategies has led to the following outcomes:
1.	ITC has expanded its renewable energy portfolio with 38.1% of its energy 	
consumption being met from renewable sources.
2.	As part of its low-carbon and green growth strategy, ITC has spearheaded the
establishment of green buildings, which have set benchmarks in energy efficiency,
water conservation and solid waste recycling. All ITC’s super premium luxury hotels
are LEED® Platinum certified. The ITC Green Centre, Gurgaon has been identified
as the highest Platinum rated Green Building in the world by the US Green Building
Council during its recertification in 2012. ITC’s iconic property in Chennai, ITC Grand
Chola, is now the largest LEED® Platinum rated green hotel in the world.

3.	ITC’s afforestation programme has greened over 1,63,000 hectares, which has
led to large-scale carbon sequestration besides creating over 70 million person
days of employment.
4.	ITC’s watershed development programme provides soil and moisture conservation to
1,49,000 hectares. This has enabled the Company retain its Water Positive status for
12 years in a row.
5.	ITC’s Wealth Out of Waste programme promotes recycling and source segregation
and creates awareness among all stakeholders on the benefits of the Reduce-ReuseRecycle Approach. This initiative has enabled ITC’s paperboards business to source
and recycle post-consumer waste, thereby contributing to ITC’s Solid Waste Recycling
Positive status.

Poverty and Social Inequities
Nearly 700 million people living in rural India, with low adaptive capacities, have a direct
and symbiotic dependence on climate sensitive sectors (agriculture, forest and fisheries)
and natural resources (water, bio-diversity, mangroves, coastal zones and grasslands) for
their subsistence and livelihood. The limited options of alternative off-farm employment,
combined with endemic poverty, continue to imperil the livelihood of millions of small and
marginal farmers, mainly in the rain-fed agriculture regions. The production regime in rainfed agriculture is inherently fragile and getting more so due to a number of factors:
1.	An estimated 147 million hectares suffer from various forms of land degradation
due to water and erosion, stemming mainly from unstable use and inappropriate
land management practices. Erosion rates are reported to be in the range of
5 to 20 tonnes/hectares.
2.	As many as 99 districts spread over 14 states were identified by the Central Water
Commission as drought prone. Such areas are concentrated in the states of Rajasthan,
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh.
3.	Of the total water available for agriculture, groundwater alone accounts for 39% of
the water used in agriculture. Yet the Central Ground Water Board reported that
1,565 blocks (one-third of the total) ranged from semi-critical to over-exploited
groundwater status.
4.	Based on the current evidence, there is a compelling case to argue that these factors
are likely to get exacerbated due to threat of climate change, leading to an increase in
the frequency and intensity of droughts and floods. Climate change over the long-term
will thus affect the rural economy in a number of ways – the majority of which would
threaten food security for the most vulnerable people.

ITC’s
Wealth
Out of Waste
programme
promotes
recycling
and source
segregation
and creates
awareness among
all stakeholders
on the benefits
of the ReduceReuse-Recycle
Approach.

51

ITC’s Initiatives
Recognising that business enterprises are the economic organs of society and draw on
societal resources, ITC believes that a company’s performance must be measured by its Triple
Bottom Line contribution to building economic, societal and environmental capital. ITC is,
therefore, committed to creating larger ‘stakeholder value’ by aligning its performance to
such Triple Bottom Line objectives. As an Indian enterprise, the Company believes that this
approach can unleash strong growth drivers to ensure inclusive and equitable development
as well as long-term business sustainability and competitiveness.
ITC has implemented an extensive social investments programme in geographies where
it has strategic business interests and presence. To ensure long-term sustainability of
these investments and to enable replication and scalability, these programmes have been
implemented in the context of value chains of the Company.
The programmes strive to empower stakeholder communities to conserve and manage
their natural resources, create sustainable on and off-farm livelihood sources and improve
social infrastructure in order to support creation of sustainable livelihoods on a significant
scale backed by an empowered stakeholder community.
The scale and impact of these initiatives are reflected in the following:
1.	ITC’s e-Choupal network has benefitted over 4 million farmers in 40,000 villages.
2.	ITC’s Social and Farm Forestry Programme has created over 70 million person days of
employment for poor tribals and marginal farmers.
3.	ITC’s Watershed Development Programme covers 1,49,000 hectares of moisturestressed areas.
4.	ITC’s Livestock Development Programme has reached out to over 10,00,000
milch animals.
5.	ITC’s Women’s Empowerment Programme has benefitted over 40,000 rural women.

Recognising
that business
enterprises are
the economic
organs of society
and draw on
societal resources,
ITC believes that
a company’s
performance must
be measured by
its Triple Bottom
Line contribution
to building
economic,
societal and
environmental
capital.

52

6.	ITC’s Supplementary Education Programme has covered over 3,00,000 children.

Supply Chain Management
The engagement with our supply chain has expanded given the growth of our new consumer
goods businesses and it will be important to integrate the Triple Bottom Line approach
amongst the supply chain to ensure long-term competitiveness by adopting a balanced
approach towards creation of livelihoods and economic viability of these units.
Our supply chain comprises a large number of small-scale partners. Many of them operate
under limiting circumstances in terms of their ability to invest in efficient technologies and
their necessity to rely on labour intensive practices. It will be important to integrate the
Triple Bottom Line approach amongst the supply chain for long-term competitiveness by
adopting a balanced approach towards creation of livelihoods and economic viability of the
small scale units.

ITC’s Initiatives
The Company’s engagement with the supply chain is being extended in a structured and
phased manner.
ITC encourages its supply chain to comply with certifications, such as ISO 9001, ISO 14001
and OHSAS 18001, to strengthen their quality, environmental and occupational health &
safety systems.

The recent Board approved policies on Responsible Sourcing and Human Rights
consideration of Stakeholders beyond the Workplace, provide the necessary framework for
the progressive extension of the Company’s Triple Bottom Line approach across the supply
chain over the next few years.

Addressing Issues Related to Employee Safety
Given India’s favourable demographic dividend, it is evident that a large pool of India’s youth
is joining the workforce every year. It is critically important for an organisation to ensure the
total safety of this valuable resource. While we are progressing steadily towards our target
of zero accidents within our premises, we cognise that accidents outside the workplace are
on the rise in India, given issues such as the steady proliferation of 2 wheelers on the roads,
which are rendered unsafe due to poor conditions and inadequate infrastructure.

ITC’s Initiatives
ITC has made significant investments over the years to ensure that all its business units
provide a safe, hygienic and humane environment to its employees. These are done
on the basis of detailed engineering and management guidelines which are based on
best international standards. To further strengthen efforts in this area, Safety Culture
programmes are being institutionalised and behavioural architecture inputs are being
used to rework and recalibrate EHS communication and training methodologies. Training
on EHS is provided to all employees (including service providers’ employees) and covers
basic induction, job specific and refresher training.

Safety
Culture
programmes
are being
institutionalised
and behavioural
architecture
inputs are
being used to
rework and
recalibrate EHS
communication
and training
methodologies.

It has been observed over the years that the majority of road accidents have involved two
wheelers and employees in the age group of 26-30 years. Accordingly a user-interactive
2-wheeler rider’s safety programme was developed and rolled out in 2011-12. Businesses
were advised to ensure that all employees using 2-wheelers are trained and that there is
a constant reinforcement of the message of exercising extreme care while on the road.
These efforts have resulted in a sharp reduction in road accidents. Despite the fact that
road infrastructure and traffic management outside ITC’s premises are well beyond our
control, ITC is providing a special thrust on training and awareness building by translating
the interactive ITC 2-wheeler rider’s safety programme into local languages to ensure
100% coverage of all employees.

53

This Eleventh Sustainability Report covers
the sustainability performance of the
Company for the period from April 1, 2013 to
March 31, 2014. We report our performance
on an annual basis and the last Sustainability
Report was published in June 2013.
ITC is headquartered at Virginia House, 37 J L
Nehru Road, Kolkata, 700 071 (India).
The contact point for any clarifications on the
Report or for requesting additional copies of
this Report is Corporate Communications
Department at the above address or e-mail:
enduringvalue@itc.in.
The reporting principles and methodology
are in accordance with the “Comprehensive”
option of the fourth generation Global
Reporting Initiative (GRI) Sustainability
Reporting Guidelines – G4. The Reporting
Principles and Standard Disclosures and

54

the Implementation Manual under G4
Sustainability Reporting Guidelines have
been followed for reporting on the General
and Specific Standard Disclosures. In
addition, Sustainability issues for relevant
sectors were also considered for materiality
identification of ITC’s various businesses.
The relevant aspects/indicators from
GRI-G4 Food Sector supplement have also
been considered while reporting the Foods
Business performance.
For the 2014 Report it was decided that the
reporting boundary would include significant
100% subsidiary companies only. Accordingly,
Bay Islands Hotels Limited, Srinivasa Resorts
Limited and Surya Nepal Private Limited have
been excluded from the reporting boundary of
2013-14. These three subsidiary companies
do not materially impact ITC’s sustainability
performance during the reporting period.

G4-17, G4-20, G4-21, G4-23

This Report highlights the Triple Bottom Line
dimensions that reflect the organisation’s
significant economic, environmental and
social impacts, or substantively influence the
assessments and decisions of stakeholders.

Our Businesses/Units continue to proactively
engage with key stakeholders, who either have
a major interest or are significantly affected
by our operations, products or services.
The details on stakeholder engagement are
covered elsewhere in the Report.
We continue our efforts to influence
sustainability practices along the value chain
and we intend to extend the process in the
years to come, to cover all our significant
suppliers. In this year, we have incorporated
the performance of 20 exclusive Third Party
Manufacturing (TPM) units catering to
the Notebooks segment of the Education
and Stationery Products Business and ATC
Limited, an associate company of ITC as part
of our supply chain.

Our
Businesses/
Units continue
to proactively
engage with key
stakeholders,
who either have a
major interest or
are significantly
affected by our
operations,
products or
services.

The economic performance reported here
is from the Company’s Report & Accounts
(R&A) 2014, audited by independent External
Auditors - M/s Deloitte Haskins & Sells.
The data in the environment & social sections
of the Report is based on actual performance
of the various businesses, factories, hotels
and large offices of the Company and the
subsidiary ITC Infotech India Limited. A
comprehensive Integrated Sustainability Data
Management System has been implemented
across the Company to collect, collate and

G4-17, G4-20, G4-21

55

analyse the sustainability performance data
of each business. Robust internal systems
and controls ensure the overall integrity and
credibility of the disclosures in the Report.
In order to obtain an objective and impartial
opinion or conclusions on the Report, ITC has
been seeking assurance from independent
professional assurance providers on all
the Sustainability Reports since we started
reporting in 2004. In the current year,
authenticity of the data and systems disclosed
in Sustainability Report 2014 and conformance
with ‘in accordance’ - comprehensive
requirements of the GRI G4 guidelines has
been verified by M/s KPMG, an independent
third party assurance provider. They have
conducted the assurance engagement as
per the International Standard for Assurance
Engagements (ISAE) 3000 and have provided
reasonable assurance - the statement of which
forms a part of this Report. Summary of work
performed by KPMG, the manner in which the
assurance engagement has been conducted,
the extent to which ITC has applied the GRI G4
Guidelines and the conclusions on the Report
are provided in the Assurance Statements
section of this Report.

Reporting
Boundary
ITC Head Office: Kolkata (West Bengal)

FMCG
Cigarette Business
Divisional Head Quarters:
Kolkata (West Bengal)
Units at:
Kolkata (West Bengal)
Bengaluru (Karnataka)
Munger (Bihar)
Saharanpur (Uttar Pradesh)
and Pune (Maharashtra)
Trade Marketing and Distribution

FMCG - OTHERS
Foods Business
Divisional Head Quarters:
Bengaluru (Karnataka)
Units at:
Haridwar (Uttarakhand)
Pune (Maharashtra)
Personal Care Products Business
Divisional Head Quarters:
Kolkata (West Bengal)
Units at:
Haridwar (Uttarakhand)
Manpura (Himachal Pradesh)
Education and Stationery Products Business
Divisional Head Quarters:
Chennai (Tamil Nadu)
Third Party Manufacturers of
Note Books – 20 nos.
Matches and Agarbatti Business
Divisional Head Quarters:
Chennai (Tamil Nadu)

HOTELS
Divisional Head Quarters:
ITC Green Centre, Gurgaon (Haryana)
ITC Hotels:
ITC Maurya (New Delhi)

56

G4-17, G4-20

ITC Grand Central (Mumbai)

Bhadrachalam (Andhra Pradesh)
Bollaram (Andhra Pradesh)

ITC Sonar (Kolkata)

Kovai (Tamil Nadu)

ITC Maratha (Mumbai)

ITC Mughal (Agra)
ITC Windsor (Bengaluru)
ITC Gardenia (Bengaluru)
ITC Rajputana (Jaipur)
ITC Grand Chola (Chennai)
My Fortune (Chennai)
WelcomHotel Sheraton New Delhi

PACKAGING AND PRINTING
BUSINESS
Divisional Head Quarters:
Chennai (Tamil Nadu)
Units at:
Munger (Bihar)
Tiruvottiyur (Tamil Nadu)

LEAF TOBACCO BUSINESS

Haridwar (Uttarakhand)

Divisional Head Quarters:

LIFESTYLE RETAILING AND
OTHERS

Guntur (Andhra Pradesh)
Units at:
Anaparti (Andhra Pradesh)
Chirala (Andhra Pradesh)
Research Centre, Rajahmundry
(Andhra Pradesh)

Lifestyle Retailing Business Head Quarters
at ITC Green Centre, Manesar (Haryana),
ITC Life Sciences & Technology Centre,
Bengaluru (Karnataka),

Mysore (Karnataka)

Central Projects Organisation,
Bengaluru (Karnataka)

AGRI BUSINESS

SUBSIDIARIES

Divisional Head Quarters:
Hyderabad (Andhra Pradesh)

ITC Infotech India Limited

PAPERBOARDS AND
SPECIALTY PAPERS BUSINESS
Divisional Head Quarters:
Hyderabad (Andhra Pradesh)
Units at:
Tribeni (West Bengal)

G4-17, G4-20

Units at:
Bengaluru (Karnataka)
Kolkata (West Bengal)

ASSOCIATES
ATC Limited,
Unit at Hosur (Tamil Nadu)

57

The following subsidiaries are included in the ITC’s Consolidated Financial Statements but are not
included in the Sustainability Report 2014:
Names of Subsidiaries

Remarks

Srinivasa Resorts Limited

*

Fortune Park Hotels Limited

*

Bay Islands Hotels Limited

*

Surya Nepal Private Limited

*

Landbase India Limited

*

BFIL Finance Limited
MRR Trading & Investment Company Limited
(a 100% subsidiary of BFIL Finance Limited)
Russell Credit Limited
Greenacre Holdings Limited
(a 100% subsidiary of Russell Credit Limited)
Wimco Limited

*

Prag Agro Farm Limited
(a 100% subsidiary of Wimco Limited)

*

Pavan Poplar Limited
(a 100% subsidiary of Wimco Limited)

*

Technico Pty Limited

*

Technico Technologies Inc.
(a 100% subsidiary of Technico Pty Limited)

*

Technico Agri Sciences Limited
(a 100% subsidiary of Technico Pty Limited)

*

Technico Asia Holdings Pty Limited
(a 100% subsidiary of Technico Pty Limited)

*

Technico Horticultural (Kunming) Co. Limited
(a 100% subsidiary of Technico Asia Holdings Pty Limited)

*

ITC Infotech Limited
(a 100% subsidiary of ITC Infotech India Limited)

*

ITC Infotech (USA), Inc.
(a 100% subsidiary of ITC Infotech India Limited)

*

Pyxis Solutions, LLC.
(a 100% subsidiary of ITC Infotech (USA), Inc.)

*

Wills Corporation Limited
Gold Flake Corporation Limited
King Maker Marketing, Inc.
WelcomHotels Lanka (Private) Limited

*

ITC Investments and Holdings Limited
North East Nutrients Private Limited

58

*

G4-17

The following Jointly controlled entities (incorporated Joint Ventures) are included in ITC’s
Consolidated Financial Statements but are not included in the Sustainability Report 2014:
Names of Joint Ventures

Remarks

Maharaja Heritage Resorts Limited

#

Espirit Hotels Private Limited

#

Logix Developers Private Limited

#

ITC Essentra Limited (formerly known as
ITC Filtrona Limited) (a joint venture of
Gold Flake Corporation Limited)

#

The following Group’s Associates are included in ITC’s Consolidated Financial Statements but are not
included in the Sustainability Report 2014:
Name

Remarks

Gujarat Hotels Limited

#

International Travel House Limited

#

Russell Investments Limited
Divya Management Limited
Antrang Finance Limited
* ITC is currently in the process of defining the system for inclusion of these entities in the Sustainability
Reporting boundary. Going forward the performance of these entities against identified material aspects
will be reported in a progressive manner.
# These entities will be progressively brought within the reporting boundary as part of ITC’s supply chain
based on identified material aspects.
These entities primarily invest in financial market instruments and do not have any material
sustainability impacts.

G4-17

59

The Company’s Corporate Governance processes are designed to support effective management
of multiple businesses while retaining focus on each one of them. The practice of Corporate
Governance at ITC takes place at three interlinked levels.

Strategic Supervision

By the Board of Directors (Board)

Strategic Management

By the Corporate Management Committee (CMC)

Executive Management

By the Divisional / Strategic Business Unit
(SBU) Chief Executive assisted by the respective
Divisional / SBU Management Committee (DMC)

The role, powers and composition of the Board, Board Committees, CMC and DMC are available
on the Company’s corporate website.

60

Governance Structure

BOARD OF DIRECTORS

CSR AND
SUSTAINABILITY
COMMITTEE

AUDIT
COMMITTEE

NOMINATION &
COMPENSATION
COMMITTEE*

STAKEHOLDERS
RELATIONSHIP
COMMITTEE

INDEPENDENT
DIRECTORS
COMMITTEE**

CORPORATE
MANAGEMENT
COMMITTEE

DIVISIONAL/SBU
MANAGEMENT
COMMITTEES

CORPORATE
FUNCTIONS

Divisional/SBU
Management Committees, each headed by a
Divisional/SBU Chief Executive

Corporate Functions, each headed by
a Head of Department

Businesses include:
FMCG, Hotels, Paperboards, Specialty
Papers & Packaging, Agri Business and
Information Technology

Corporate Functions include:
Planning & Treasury, Accounting, Taxation,
Risk Management, Legal, Secretarial,
Internal Audit, EHS, Human Resources, Corporate
Communications, Corporate Affairs, Research &
Development, Central Projects Organisation and
IT Support Services

*

Effective 1st April, 2014, a ‘Nomination & Compensation Committee’ (in place of the ‘Nominations Committee’ and the ‘Compensation
Committee’) was constituted in terms of the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013.
** Effective 1st April, 2014, the Board has constituted an ‘Independent Directors Committee’.

61

Board of Directors
The ITC Board is a balanced Board comprising
Executive Directors and Non-Executive Directors.

SELECTION OF DIRECTORS
ITC’s Governance Policy requires that the
Non-Executive Directors, including Independent
Directors, be drawn from amongst
eminent professionals with experience in
business / finance / law / public
administration and enterprises.
Directors are appointed / re-appointed with
the approval of the Shareholders for a period
of three to five years or a shorter duration in
accordance with retirement guidelines as
determined by the Board from time to time.
The Nomination Committee recommends,
inter alia, Executive Directors’ appointment
to the Board, appointment to the Corporate

Director

No. of
other
Directorship(s)1

Management Committee and the seniormost
level of executive management below the
Executive Directors.
The initial appointment of Executive Directors
is normally for a period of three years. All
Directors are liable to retire by rotation unless
otherwise approved by the Shareholders or
provided under any statute.
The Independent Directors have confirmed
that they meet the criteria of ‘Independence’
as stipulated under the statute.

COMPOSITION OF THE BOARD
The strength of the Board as on 31st March,
2014, was fourteen, of which four were
Executive Directors and seven Independent
Directors. The composition of the Board,
including other Directorships / Committee
memberships of Directors was as follows:-

No. of Membership(s) [including
Chairmanship(s)] of Board
Committees of other companies2

Executive Directors
Y. C. Deveshwar
(Chairman)
N. Anand
P. V. Dhobale
K. N. Grant
Non-Executive Directors
A. Baijal
A. V. Girija Kumar
S. H. Khan
R. E. Lerwill
S. B. Mathur
P. B. Ramanujam
S. S. H. Rehman
A. Ruys
M. Shankar (Ms)
K. Vaidyanath

1

Nil

8
Nil
2

1
Nil
1

3
1
6
Nil
12
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil

1 (as Chairman)
Nil
9 (including 4 as Chairman)
Nil
8 (including 3 as Chairman)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil

1. Excludes Directorship in Indian Private Limited Companies & Foreign Companies and Membership of
Managing Committees of Chambers of Commerce / Professional Bodies.
2. Denotes Membership / Chairmanship of Audit Committee and / or Investors Grievance Committee of
Indian Public Limited Companies.

ITC’s Governance Policy requires the Board to meet at least six times in a year. During the
year, six meetings of the Board were held.

62

Board Committees
During the financial year 2013-14, there
were five Board Committees – the Audit
Committee, the Compensation Committee,
the Stakeholders Relationship Committee,
the Nominations Committee and the CSR and
Sustainability Committee.

AUDIT COMMITTEE
The Audit Committee, as on 31st March, 2014,
comprised five Non-Executive Directors,
four of whom were Independent Directors.
The Chairman of the Committee was an
Independent Director. The Executive Director
representing the Finance function, the Chief
Financial Officer, the Head of Internal Audit and
the representative of the Statutory Auditors
were Invitees to the Audit Committee. The
Head of Internal Audit was the Co-ordinator
and the Company Secretary was the Secretary
to the Committee. The representatives of the
Cost Auditors are invited to meetings of the
Audit Committee whenever matters relating
to cost audit are considered. All members of
the Committee are financially literate; three
members, including the Chairman of the
Committee, have accounting and financial
management expertise.

COMPENSATION COMMITTEE
The Compensation Committee, as on 31st
March, 2014, comprised five Non-Executive
Directors, four of whom were Independent
Directors. The Chairman of the Committee
was an Independent Director.

STAKEHOLDERS
RELATIONSHIP COMMITTEE
The Stakeholders Relationship Committee (earlier
known as ‘Investor Services Committee’), as
on 31st March, 2014, comprised five Directors,
three of whom were Independent Directors. The
Chairman of the Committee was an Independent
Director.

NOMINATIONS COMMITTEE
The Nominations Committee, as on 31st
March, 2014, comprised the Chairman of the

Company and eight Non-Executive Directors,
seven of whom were Independent Directors.
The Chairman of the Company was the
Chairman of the Committee.

CSR AND SUSTAINABILITY
COMMITTEE
The CSR and Sustainability Committee (earlier
known as ‘Sustainability Committee’), as on
31st March, 2014, comprised the Chairman
of the Company and three Non-Executive
Directors, two of whom are Independent
Directors. The Chairman of the Company was
the Chairman of the Committee.
The CSR and Sustainability Committee
inter alia, reviews, monitors and provides
strategic direction to the Company’s CSR and
sustainability practices towards fulfilling its
Triple Bottom Line objectives. The Committee
seeks to guide the Company in integrating
its social and environmental objectives
with its business strategies and assists in
crafting unique models to support creation
of sustainable livelihoods. The Committee
formulates, reviews & monitors the CSR Policy
and recommends to the Board the annual
CSR Plan of the Company. The Committee
also reviews the Business Responsibility
Report of the Company.
ITC has clearly defined roles and responsibilities
for specific areas that encompass the economic,
environment and social dimensions. The

The
CSR and
Sustainability
Committee inter
alia, reviews,
monitors and
provides strategic
direction to the
Company’s CSR
and sustainability
practices towards
fulfilling its Triple
Bottom Line
objectives.

63

Corporate Management Committee of the
Company reviews and monitors performance
on these dimensions to ensure progress on a
continual basis.
The Corporate Management Committee has
constituted a Sustainability Compliance
Review
Committee,
which
presently
comprises an Executive Director, two
members of the Corporate Management
Committee and five senior members of
management. The role of the Committee,
inter alia, includes monitoring and evaluating
compliance with the Sustainability Policies
of the Company and placing a quarterly
report thereon for review by the Corporate
Management Committee.
The following are the Terms of Reference for the
Sustainability Compliance Review Committee :To provide direction on the implementation
of ITC’s sustainability policies

ITC has
constituted
a Sustainability
Compliance
Review
Committee,
which presently
comprises an
Executive Director,
two members
of the Corporate
Management
Committee
and five senior
members of
management.

To approve appointment of third party
assurance provider for sustainability
reporting
To review and approve the Annual
Sustainability Report including the
materiality matrix
To facilitate the identification of issues
beyond the horizon
To review the sustainability risk portfolio of
ITC and report back on closure by businesses

64

To review critical concerns raised by
stakeholder and the corrective actions
taken, as applicable
To review progress towards achievement of
50% renewable energy share by 2020 and
water security
To provide guidance on ITC’s public
disclosures
and
engagement
with
external agencies

Chair of the
Highest
Governance Body
The Chairman is the Chief Executive of the
Company. He is the Chairman of the Board
and the CMC. His primary role is to provide

leadership to the Board and the CMC for
realising Company goals in accordance with
the charter approved by the Board.

have potential conflict with the interests of
the Company at large; such confirmations
are placed before the Board.

ITC has a diversified business portfolio, which
demands that the senior leadership has
an in-depth knowledge and understanding
of the functioning of the Company, so as
to enhance the value-generating capacity
of the organisation and contribute
significantly to stakeholders’ aspirations
and societal expectations. The Chairman of
the Company is therefore chosen from the
Executive Management.

All transactions of the Company with
related parties, if any, or their subsequent
modifications, are required to be approved
by the Audit Committee. Further, certain
transactions with related parties which are
not in the ordinary course of business or not
on arm’s length basis would also require the
approval of the Board or Shareholders.

Avoidance of
Conflicts of
Interest
In terms of the ITC Code of Conduct, Directors,
senior management and employees must
avoid situations in which their personal
interests could conflict with the interests
of the Company. This is an area in which
it is impossible to provide comprehensive
guidance but the guiding principle is that
conflicts, if any, or potential conflicts, must
be disclosed to higher management for
guidance and action as appropriate.
Senior management is required to confirm on
an annual basis that no material transaction
has been entered into by them which could

The Company has a code of conduct for
prevention of insider trading in the securities

of the Company. The ITC Code of Conduct
for Prevention of Insider Trading, inter alia,
prohibits purchase or sale of securities of the
Company by Directors and employees while
in possession of unpublished price sensitive
information in relation to the Company.

ITC has
a diversified
business
portfolio, which
demands that the
senior leadership
has an in-depth
knowledge and
understanding of
the functioning of
the Company, so
as to enhance the
value-generating
capacity of the
organisation
and contribute
significantly to
stakeholders’
aspirations
and societal
expectations.

Performance
of the Highest
Governance Body
and Evaluation
The Board is equipped to perform its role of
business assessment through inputs from
time to time. Directors are fully briefed on all
business related matters, risk assessment &

65

ITC
believes that
every employee
is a trustee of
its stakeholders
and must strictly
adhere to the
Code of Conduct
and conduct
himself/herself
at all times in a
professional and
ethical manner.

minimisation procedures, and new initiatives
proposed by the Company. Directors are
also updated on changes / developments
in the domestic / global corporate and
industry scenario including those pertaining
to statutes / legislation, social and
economic environment.
The Board annually evaluates Directors
collectively to reinforce the principle of
collective responsibility.
The Board determines the remuneration of
the Chairman and other Executive Directors,
on the recommendation of the Nomination
& Compensation Committee; remuneration
of the Directors is subject to the approval
of the shareholders. Such remuneration is
linked to the performance of the Company
in as much as the performance bonus is
based on various qualitative and quantitative
performance criteria. Such criteria also
includes the Company’s contribution with
respect to sustainable development of the
society / nation & social investments and
sensitivity to environment.
Remuneration to Non-Executive Directors is
by way of commission for each financial year;
such commission is determined by the Board
within the limit approved by the shareholders.
Their remuneration is based, inter alia,
on Company performance and regulatory
provisions and is payable on a uniform
basis to reinforce the principle of collective
responsibility. Non-Executive Directors are also
entitled to sitting fees for attending meetings
of the Board and Committees thereof, the
quantum of which is determined by the Board.

Remuneration and
Incentives
ITC’s remuneration strategy is marketled, leverages performance and takes into
account the Company’s capacity to pay. The
remuneration package is competitive and is
designed to attract and retain quality talent.
The ratio of remuneration of the highest
paid employee to the median remuneration
for the year 2013-14 was 252:1, computed
on the basis of Total Compensation. The
median Total Compensation covers all
management staff and office associates
(excluding the highest paid employee).

66

Components included in determining Total
Compensation
are
Basic/Consolidated
Salary, Supplementary Allowance, Utility
Allowance, House Rent Allowance or
Perquisite Value of Housing, other Cash
Allowances,
Variable
Compensation
including Annual Performance Bonus /
Variable Pay/Sales Incentives as appropriate;
and value of Perquisites computed as per IT
guidelines.
The ratio of the annual increase (percentage)
in Total Compensation of the highest paid
employee to the median annual increase
(percentage) in Total Compensation of all
management staff and office associates
(excluding the highest paid employee) was
10:28 in 2013-14.
Total Compensation excludes contributions
towards
Retirement
Benefits
and
Options granted under the Employee
Stock Option Scheme.
Compensation for unionised employees
is determined on the basis of Long Term
Agreements (LTA) with the unions.

Ethics and Integrity
ITC believes that every employee is a trustee of
its stakeholders and must strictly adhere to a
Code of Conduct and conduct himself/herself
at all times in a professional and ethical
manner. Integrity is a core value and forms the
basis of the Company’s organisational culture.
ITC’s Code of Conduct, has been in place
since 1996. The Code is anchored in three
core principles - good corporate governance,
good corporate citizenship and exemplary
personal conduct in relation to the Company’s
business and reputation. The Code clearly
spells out guidelines for employees on dealing
with people in the organisation, ensuring a
gender friendly workplace, relationships with
suppliers and customers, legal compliance,
health & safety, avoidance of conflict of
interest, transparency and auditability in
all their actions, protection of confidential
information, leading by example etc.
The ITC Code of Conduct is displayed on the
Company’s corporate website and is shared
with employees at the time of their induction
into the Company. Any violation of the ITC

Code of Conduct by an employee renders
him/her liable for disciplinary action.

robustness to the process of ensuring that
business risks are effectively addressed.

ITC’s Code of Conduct specifically states that
in the context of possible or potential areas
of conflict of interest, such incidents must be
disclosed immediately to higher management
for guidance and action as appropriate

Appropriate structures have been put in
place to proactively monitor and manage the
inherent risks in Businesses with unique/
relatively high risk profiles.

A Whistleblower Policy is also in place
and has been displayed on the Company’s
corporate website and has been appropriately
communicated to all employees.

Risk Management
As a diversified enterprise, the Company
has always had a system-based approach to
business risk management.
The Corporate Risk Management Cell works
with the Businesses to establish and monitor
the specific profiles including strategic,
operational, environmental and social related
risks. The process includes the prioritisation
of risks, selection of appropriate mitigation
strategies and periodic reviews of the
progress on the management of risks.
A combination of centrally issued policies
and divisionally evolved procedures brings

A robust and comprehensive framework
of strategic planning and performance
management
ensures
realisation
of
business objectives, based on effective
strategy implementation. The annual
planning exercise requires all Businesses to
clearly identify their top risks and set out a
mitigation plan with agreed timelines and
accountability. Businesses have confirmed
that all relevant business risks have
been identified, assessed, evaluated and
appropriate mitigation systems have been
implemented.
The combination of policies and processes,
as outlined above, adequately addresses the
various risks associated with the Company’s
businesses. The senior management of the
Company also periodically reviews the risk
management framework to maintain its
contemporariness so as to effectively address
the emerging challenges in a dynamic
business environment.

A
robust and
comprehensive
framework of
strategic planning
and performance
management
ensures realisation
of business
objectives,
based on
effective strategy
implementation.

67

Economic
Performance

Progressive
investments in
multiple drivers
of growth
Sustaining high
quality top line
and earnings
growth
26% growth in
total shareholder
returns over the
last 18 years
50 fold increase
in market
capitalisation
from 1996

Continuing
with its
chosen strategy
of creating
multiple drivers
of growth, the
Company is
presently the
leading FMCG
marketer in India,
a trailblazer in
‘green hoteliering’
and the second
largest Hotel
chain in India,
the clear market
leader in the
Indian Paperboard
and Packaging
industry and
the country’s
foremost Agri
business player.
ITC’s wholly
owned subsidiary,
ITC Infotech
India Limited,
is one of India’s
fast growing
Information
Technology
companies in
the mid-tier
segment.

70

Management
Approach

opportunities, key challenges, etc. pertaining
to each of the Company’s businesses.

ITC’s commitment towards maintaining
its high economic growth trajectory is
encapsulated in its Vision statement, which
is to ‘Sustain ITC’s position as one of India’s
most valuable corporations through worldclass performance, creating growing value
for the Indian economy and the Company’s
stakeholders’. ITC’s Mission is ‘to enhance the
wealth generating capability of the enterprise
in a globalising environment delivering
superior and sustainable stakeholder value’.

Economic
Performance

The Company’s strategy is to ensure that
each of its businesses is world-class and
internationally competitive in not only the
global Indian market but also progressively
in offshore global markets.
As a premier ‘Indian’ enterprise, and with a
larger commitment to enhancing its Triple
Bottom Line contribution, ITC has consciously
crafted innovative strategies for ensuring the
competitiveness of the entire value chain of
which it is a part. This philosophy has shaped
the Company’s approach to business to
embrace ‘a commitment beyond the market’.

Goals and
Performance
At the enterprise level, the Company’s goals
include Sustaining ITC’s position as one of India’s
most valuable corporations.
Achieving leadership in each of the business
segments within a reasonable time frame.
Achieving a Return on Capital Employed
(ROCE) in excess of the Company’s cost of
capital, at all times.
Please refer to the ‘Report of the Directors
and Management Discussion and Analysis’
section of the Report and Accounts 2014
(available on www.itcportal.com) for a
detailed discussion on the Company’s market
standing in each of the business segments, as
well as the operating business environment,

ITC continued to deliver strong financial
performance with healthy growth in revenues
and high quality earnings. This performance
is particularly significant when viewed
against the backdrop of the extremely
challenging business context in which it
was achieved, namely, a sluggish macroeconomic environment which saw GDP growth
remaining below 5% for the second year in
succession. ITC’s robust financial performance
was achieved against the backdrop of high
inflation and a marked deceleration in the
rate of growth of Private Final Consumption
Expenditure; steep increase in taxes/duties
on Cigarettes for two years in a row; weak
demand conditions in the FMCG industry;
gestation costs relating to the new FMCG
businesses; sharp escalation in input costs in
the Paperboards, Paper & Packaging Business
and a weak demand & pricing environment in
the Hotels businesses.
Gross Revenue for the year grew by 11.7%
to ` 46,713 Crores. Net Revenue at ` 32,883
Crores grew by 11.1% primarily driven by a
16.0% growth in the non-cigarette FMCG
businesses, 14.7% growth in Paperboards,
Paper & Packaging together with 10.6%
growth in the Cigarettes Business. Profit
Before Tax increased by 18.5% to ` 12,659
Crores while Net profits at ` 8,785 Crores
registered a growth of 18.4%.
Earnings Per Share for the year stood at
` 11.09 (previous year ` 9.45), while Cash
flows from Operations aggregated ` 10,760
Crores compared to ` 9,596 Crores in the
previous year.
Continuing with its chosen strategy of creating
multiple drivers of growth, the Company
is presently the leading FMCG marketer in
India, a trailblazer in ‘green hoteliering’
and the second largest Hotel chain in
India, the clear market leader in the Indian
Paperboard and Packaging industry and the
country’s foremost Agri business player.

ITC’s wholly owned subsidiary, ITC Infotech
India Limited, is one of India’s fast growing
Information Technology companies in the
mid-tier segment.
ITC is one of India’s most admired and valuable
corporations with a market capitalisation of
over ` 2,70,000 Crores and has consistently
featured amongst the top 10 private sector
companies in terms of market capitalisation
and profits over the last eighteen years.
Additionally, during this period, the Company’s
Net Revenues and Profits after taxes recorded
an impressive compound growth of 15.3%
and 21.6% per annum respectively. Return

on Capital Employed improved substantially
from 28.4% to 45.8%. Total Shareholder
Returns, measured in terms of increase in
market capitalisation and dividends, grew
at a compound annual growth rate of over
25.9%, placing the Company amongst the
foremost in the country in terms of efficiency
of servicing financial capital.

ITC is
one of India’s
most admired
and valuable
corporations
with a market
capitalisation of
over ` 2,70,000
Crores and has
consistently
featured amongst
the top 10 private
sector companies
in terms of market
capitalisation and
profits over the
last eighteen
years.

For the year ended 31st March, 2014, ITC
declared a Dividend of ` 6.00 per share
(previous year ` 5.25 per share).

Direct Economic Impact

` Crores
Key Economic Indicators*
Gross Revenue
Net Revenue
Exports

2010
26,200
18,153
2,239

2011
30,528
21,168
2,464

2012
34,872
24,798
2,315

2013
41,810
29,606
3,474

2014
46,713
32,883
4,046

CAGR
16%
16%
16%

Contribution to
Government/Exchequer

13,491

15,860

18,006

22,343

25,669

17%

Cost of Bought out
Goods and Services

10,819

12,374

14,255

17,031

18,391

14%

Employee Benefits Expense
Payments to Providers of Capital
- Interest and Dividend
- Retained Profits

1,003
3,500
3,891
-391

1,140
4,498
3,512
986

1,258
5,669
3,596
2,073

1,387
6,800
4,235
2,565

1,608
7,977
4,775
3,202

13%
23%

* Detailed Financial Performance available at www.itcportal.com

71

Revenue And Profit Before Depreciation Interest and Tax (PBDIT)

ITC
continued to
make significant
investments
across its business
domains, even
as it has been
successful in
progressively
generating
higher returns
on the assets
deployed.

` Crores
Year
Gross Revenue
PBDIT

2010
26,200
6,689

2011
30,528
7,993

2012
34,872
9,674

2013
41,810
11,566

2014
46,713
13,562

CAGR
16%
19%

Total Assets and
Returns
Despite the extremely challenging business
environment during the year under review, ITC
continued to make significant investments
across its business domains, even as it has
been successful in progressively generating
higher returns on the assets deployed.
Therefore, while the Balance Sheet size of
the Company has expanded at a compound
rate of 14% over the previous five years to
reach ` 39,229 Crores as at 31st March, 2014,
returns on assets deployed have increased
from about 26% to about 32% during the
same period.

Return on Total Assets

` Crores
33%

40,000

32%
36,000

31%
30%

32,000

29%
28%

28,000

27%
26%

24,000

25%
20,000

24%
2010

2011

Total Assets (RHS)

72

2012

2013

2014

Return on Total Assets (LHS)

Market
Capitalisation and
Earnings Per Share
ITC is one of India’s most admired and
valuable corporations and has, over the last
18 years, consistently featured amongst
the top 10 private sector companies in
terms of market capitalisation & profits. The
Company’s shares are amongst the most
influential stocks in the Indian equity market.
1996

Year

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

CAGR

Market Capitalisation
5,571 100,476 140,408 177,360 244,245 280,708 24%
(` Crores)*
Adjusted EPS (`)**

0.35

5.31

6.45

7.88

9.39

11.05

21%

* Market Capitalisation based on year-end closing prices quoted on the Bombay Stock Exchange.
** EPS adjusted for impact of Corporate Actions to facilitate like to like comparison.

Analysis of
Value Added
Distribution of Value Added

` Crores
40,000
35,000
22%

30,000
22%

25,000
21%

20,000
15,000

19%
06%

05%

5,000

05%

23%
05%

73%

73%

10,000
75%

05%

74%

72%

0
2010
Exchequer

2011
2012
Employees
Providers of Capital

2013

2014

Contribution
to the National
Exchequer
The Company’s contribution accounts for
about 7.7% of the total excise revenue of the
Government of India. In the area of income tax,
the Company is the highest tax payer in eastern
India and among the top tax payers nationally
in the private sector.

73

Contribution To Exchequer

` Crores
26,000

25,669
22,343

22,500
18,006

19,000
15,500

15,860
13,491

12,000
8,500
5,000
1,500
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

Contribution to Exchequer

Dividend Payout
For the current year, the Company has
declared a dividend of ` 6.00 per share of
` 1/- each.
Dividend Paid (incl. Dividend Distribution Tax)

` Crores
6,000

5,000

4,000

3,000

2449

1484

5583
4853
4089

2,000
2004

2518

1,000
2010

Ordinary Dividend

74

2011

2012

2013

2010 - Special Centenary Dividend
2011 - Special Dividend on 100th AGM

2014

Locally Based
Suppliers
The Company’s suppliers, both local and
international, constitute one of its important
stakeholder groups. Supplier engagements
are established on a conducive procurement
culture supported by policies, processes and
best practices to ensure that procurement
activities are conducted in an open,
transparent and non-discriminatory manner.
Strong processes are in place to identify,
develop and qualify vendors on the basis
of supply assurance, innovation quotient,
product quality and delivering value for money.
Procurement activity is conducted through
established formal competitive processes and
documented discussions, recommendations
and decisions.
All businesses of the Company operate
modern facilities and utilise state-of-theart technologies to ensure benchmarked
quality and value. Accordingly, the Company
sources specialised production machinery
from reputed international and Indian
manufacturers – across large, medium and
small scale sectors. Utility machinery such

as boilers, generator sets, air-conditioning
and refrigeration machinery and electrical &
electronic systems are sourced largely from
Indian or India-based suppliers. Competent
Indian contractors carry out construction and
renovation of new manufacturing facilities,
hotels, warehouses & offices. More than 87%
of raw materials and stores & spares have been
locally procured during the reporting year.
The Company actively encourages competency
development among local vendors and its
vendor base includes numerous medium and
small scale enterprises that are proximate to its
manufacturing locations. Where appropriate,
vendors are provided technical support and
managerial inputs to enable them to move
in tandem with the Company’s business
plans. The Company also supports several
vocational training initiatives in the vicinity
of its operations. These have been effective
in empowering youth with requisite skills and
increased opportunities for entrepreneurial
development. In addition, the Company has
continued to set up sourcing centres in rural
India for several of its product categories, both
directly and in collaboration with various State
agencies and NGOs to assist in the creation of
sustainable livelihoods.

Raw Materials, Stores and Spares Consumed

9165

` Crores

8018
6826
6184

5379

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014
1335

1138
772

2010
Imported

1001

2011
Indigenous

1067

2012

2013

2014

Supplier
engagements
are established
on a conducive
procurement
culture supported
by policies,
processes and
best practices
to ensure that
procurement
activities are
conducted in an
open, transparent
and nondiscriminatory
manner.

75

Financial
Assistance from
Government

Tax, which is repayable over a period ranging
from 10 to 14 years. The amount of such
assistance in the form of Deferred Sales Tax due
to be repaid by the Paperboards and Specialty
Papers Division (PSPD) is given below:

The states of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu
offer incentives by way of deferment of Sales
Deferred Sales Tax

` Crores
100
90

92

91
86
78

80

66

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2010
Deferred Sales Tax

76

2011

2012

2013

2014

Engaging Talent,
Local Hiring
and Senior
Management

customer-focused, competition-differentiated,
performance-driven and future-capable.
The
Company’s
Human
Resource
Development strategy seeks to fulfil this
mandate through careful selection and
rigorous implementation of a wide range of
programmes and interventions.

ITC’s
human
resource
management
systems and processes are relentlessly

` Crores
1,800
1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000
800

1331

148

162

127

115

1024

902

600

1112
783

400
200

117

102
118

0
2010

128
106

121
2011

Contribution to Provident & Other Funds

2012

2013

Workmen & Staff Welfare

2014

ITC’s
human
resource
management
systems and
processes are
relentlessly
customerfocused,
competitiondifferentiated,
performancedriven and
future-capable.

Salaries & Wages

77

ITC believes that its competitive capability
to build future-ready businesses and
create enduring value for stakeholders is
enriched by a dedicated and high-quality
human resource pool. Therefore, nurturing
quality talent and caring for the well-being
of employees are an integral part of ITC’s
work culture, which focuses on creating
a conducive work environment that helps
deliver winning performance.
The Company’s policy on “Diversity and Equal
Opportunity” is premised on its fundamental
belief that diversity at the workplace
creates an environment favourable to
engagement, alignment, innovation and
high performance. The Policy provides for
diversity and equal opportunities to all
employees across the Company, based on
merit and ability. The policy also ensures a
work environment that is free from any form

political, religious or union organisation or
majority/minority group.
The Company’s talent management strategy
is focused on building a future-ready
talent bank in the organisation to ensure a
pipeline of high-quality managerial talent,
specialists and business leaders. ITC’s talent
engagement approach focuses on attracting
and nurturing quality talent, supported
by significant investments in learning and
development.
In 2013-14, the minimum wage paid to entry
level workers of the Company was
equal to or more than the statutory
minimum
wage
applicable
at
all
locations of ITC’s operations. Employees’
Retirement Benefit Schemes include
employee pension, provident fund and
gratuity, which are administered through duly
constituted and approved independent trusts.

ITC’s
talent
engagement
approach focuses
on attracting and
nurturing quality
talent, supported
by significant
investments in
learning and
development.

of discrimination amongst its employees
in compensation, training and employee
benefits, based on caste, religion, disability,
gender, sexual orientation, race, colour,
ancestry, marital status or affiliation with a

78

Provident Fund and Family Pension
contributions in respect of unionised staff, as
required by applicable statutes, are deposited
with the Government in a timely manner.

Pension plans and other applicable employee
benefits obligations are determined and
funded in accordance with independent
actuarial valuation. Expected rate of return
on plan assets is based on the current
portfolio of assets, investment strategy and
market scenario.

ITC has diversified plan assets in order to
protect capital and optimise returns within
acceptable risk parameters. In addition,
funds are consistently sustained to meet
requisite superannuation commitments.

Contribution to Provident and Other Funds

` Crores
77
53

51

38
20
2010
118

2010

2011

2012

2013
127

121

115

106

2011

Contribution to Pension Funds

2014

2012

2013

2014

Contribution to Provident & Other Funds

79

Corporate Social
Responsibility
ITC’s overarching aspiration to create
significant and sustainable societal value
is inspired by a vision to subserve a larger
national purpose and abide by the strong
value of trusteeship. This larger commitment
is manifest in ITC’s CSR initiatives that include
the most disadvantaged sections of society,
especially in rural India, through economic
empowerment based on grassroots capacity
building. In the social sector, the two most
important stakeholders for the Company are:
Rural communities with whom ITC’s agribusinesses have forged a long and enduring
partnership through their crop development
activities and the ITC e-Choupal, the world’s
largest unique rural digital infrastructure
network that enables dissemination of
valuable information relating to weather
conditions, agricultural best practices, ruling
market prices etc.; these households operate
in rain-fed conditions in some of the most
moisture-stressed regions of the country.
Communities residing in close proximity
of the Company’s production units, whose

ITC’s
overarching
aspiration to
create significant
and sustainable
societal value
is inspired by a
vision to subserve
a larger national
purpose and
abide by the
strong value of
trusteeship.

80

full potential cannot be realised due to
poor social infrastructure in the areas of
education and health.
In pursuance of the Company’s policy on
Corporate Social Responsibility (ITC’s CSR
Policy detailed in the Policies & Guidelines
section of this Report and in the section
on Report of the Directors & Management
Discussion and Analysis in the Annual
Report and Accounts 2014), the thrust of the
Company’s CSR strategy and programmes
has been focused on (a) Diversification of
farming systems of rural communities by
broad-basing the farm and off-farm based
livelihoods portfolio of the poor, through
an integrated approach that includes the
development of wastelands, watersheds,
agriculture and animal husbandry, and (b)
Economic empowerment of women and
creation of social capital in the catchment
habitations of manufacturing units to enable
these communities to acquire relevant and
contemporary skills.
Various CSR activities in which the Company
has been engaged during the current year
are listed on the next page.

Area

Activities/Initiatives/Programmes
(including through trusts
established by the Company)
Promotion and Support of
Primary Education

Promoting and facilitating primary
education, employment enhancing
vocational skills and livelihood
enhancement programmes

Vocational Training/
Skills Development
Livelihood Enhancement (Integrated
Animal Husbandry Programme, Agriextension services, Livestock Development,
Farm Productivity Enhancement)

Ensuring
Environmental Sustainability

Environmental Sustainability
(Social Forestry, Soil and Moisture
Conservation, Sustainable Water Security,
source segregation of recyclable materials
through Wealth Out of Waste initiative,
Conservation of Natural Resources,
promotion and advocacy of
sustainability in partnership with
CII-ITC Centre of Excellence etc.)

Rural Development Projects

Rural Development

Eradicating hunger, poverty and
malnutrition, promoting health care
(including preventive healthcare)
and sanitation and making
available safe drinking water

Sanitation
Health infrastructure, healthcare
and medical aid

Women’s Empowerment and
programmes for reducing
inequalities faced by socially and
economically backward groups

Women’s Micro Enterprises,
Sustainable livelihoods for women

Protection of national heritage,
Art and Culture

Promotion of Art and Culture

* Details are available in the Social Investments - Mission Sunehra Kal section of this Report

The Company’s CSR spends over the last three years is as follows:

` Crores
2012

2013

2014

Corporate Social Responsibility spends*

58

78

107

Average Net Profits (as specified under
Companies Act, 2013) for three immediately
preceding Financial Years (FYs)

6003

7320

8847

0.96%

1.06%

1.20%

CSR spends as a % of Average Net Profits (as
defined by Companies Act, 2013) for three
immediately preceding Financial Years (FYs)

*	 The expenditure on CSR has been aligned with the activities specified in Schedule VII to the Companies Act, 2013.
Previous year’s figures have also been realigned to correspond with the current year’s disclosures.

81

Environmental
Performance

Management
Approach

Energy

Significant Air Emissions

Water Management

Recycling and
Waste Management

Raw Materials

Biodiversity

ITC
has identified
several physical
and regulatory
risks that can
impact the longterm sustainability
of the
organisation.

84

The challenges related to environment and
ecosystems especially due to climate change
are complex, long-term and inter-related,
especially in terms of its impact on water
and availability of other natural resources.
This in turn has wide-ranging implications
on ITC and its stakeholders. ITC accordingly
has identified several physical and regulatory
risks that can impact the long-term
sustainability of the organisation:In India, about 75% of its population
and around 50% of its workforce is
dependent on agriculture and related
activities for livelihoods. Since over twothirds of agricultural output is generated
through rain-fed agriculture, any change
in precipitation patterns owing to climate
change would significantly disrupt yields.
Retreating glaciers will also adversely impact
water availability in snow-fed rivers, which

are a lifeline to a significant portion of the
country’s population. Rising sea levels on
the other hand will increase the risk of
contaminating coastal groundwater supplies,
thereby further aggravating the situation.
Resultant disruption in crop yields
could lead to increased competition for
agricultural commodities.
Extreme weather events like hurricanes
and typhoons are an anticipated outcome
of climate change. These may pose a major
threat to ITC properties in coastal areas
and may disrupt operations. These extreme
weather events can also disrupt rail and
road traffic links,further affecting supply of
essential raw materials and finished goods.
Increased temperatures would increase
air conditioning costs and also impact
agricultural productivity.

Energy security is expected to be one of
the biggest developmental challenges with
around 400 million people lacking reliable
access to energy in India. Climate change
impacts will assume increasing importance
in the context of continued usage of fossil
fuels and development of viable sustainable
alternatives and achieving highest levels
of energy efficiency will be of paramount
importance.
India’s commitment to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change,
to reduce its GHG emissions per unit of
GDP by 20-25% by 2020 over 2005 levels
(as part of the Nationally Appropriate
Mitigation Action plan) is also in alignment
with its National Action Plan on Climate
Change. This could lead to a carbon tax or
additional requirements under the Perform,

Achieve, Trade (PAT) and Renewable Energy
Certificates (REC) schemes in order to
incentivise low carbon energy usage, which
could have an impact on our Paperboards
and Specialty Papers Business.
Rapid and unplanned urbanisation is
putting increasing pressure on basic civic
infrastructure and issues such as municipal
waste disposal are assuming critical
importance. Given our significant presence
in the FMCG as well as Packaging Business
segments, ITC also cognises for these
concerns. The Company is progressively
implementing appropriate programmes in
partnership with Civil Society Organisations
to address the twin issues of waste
management and creation of sustainable
livelihoods for people engaged in the
informal rag picking business.

Energy
security is
expected to be
one of the biggest
developmental
challenges with
around 400
million people
lacking reliable
access to energy
in India.

85

Management
Approach
At an organisational level, the Company
has adopted the following approach in its
relentless efforts to continuously improve
environmental performance:Ensuring the sustainability of agriculture
through integrated watershed development
and soil and moisture conservation projects
whilst creating sustainable livelihoods for
large numbers of marginal farmers.
Evaluating
agricultural
productivity/
adaptation issues related to climate
change and providing support to farmers
through extension services which includes
information on better agricultural practices,
market access, etc.
Maximising water usage efficiencies and
augmenting rainwater harvesting.
Reinforcing the protection of our assets in
coastal areas in anticipation of increased
severity of storms and cyclones.

ITC’s
approach
focusses on
ensuring the
sustainability
of agriculture
through
integrated
watershed
development and
soil and moisture
conservation
projects whilst
creating
sustainable
livelihoods for
large numbers
of marginal
farmers.

86

Developing
appropriate
contingency
and insurance plans for uninterrupted
production and delivery, in situations of
extreme weather events that may disrupt
road and rail traffic.
Moving beyond statutory compliance with
respect to emissions, effluents and wastes.
Incorporating “Green Building”/“Green
Factory” features into existing and
upcoming establishments.
Adopting a low carbon growth path by
reducing specific energy consumption,
increasing the use of energy from renewable
sources, reducing specific GHG emissions
and enhancing carbon sequestration.
Contributing towards waste management
through minimisation of its own waste
generation, maximising waste reuse &
recycling and using post-consumer waste
as raw material.
ITC
Businesses
have
internalised
environmental best practices on the basis of
which, it strives to maximise the efficiencies of

natural resource usage across its operations.
In addition, ITC also constantly endeavours
to create a positive environmental footprint.
Large-scale Social and Farm Forestry,
Integrated
Watershed
Development,
Sustainable Agriculture Practices and logistic
network optimisation of our FMCG products,
etc. are a few examples of extensive initiatives
in this direction.
Board approved Policies such as those on
Environment, Health and Safety, Life Cycle
Sustainability of Products and Services and
Responsible Sourcing, provide the necessary
direction to address the direct impacts
of the Company’s own operations as well
as progressively extend the efforts along
the supply chain. (please refer to Policies
available at www.itcportal.com)
It is the overall responsibility of the
Divisional/Strategic Business Unit (SBU)
Chief Executives, through the members of
the respective Management Committees,
General Managers and Unit Heads, to ensure
implementation of relevant policies and
standards on environmental performance. This
also includes institution of various committees
and designating specific responsibilities.

ITC’s Corporate Environment, Health &
Safety (EHS) Department is responsible for
reviewing and updating Corporate Standards,
verifying compliance, providing guidance and
support as required. Compliance is regularly
monitored and evaluated by the Sustainability
Compliance Review Committee (SCRC) of the
Corporate Management Committee (CMC).

The Road Ahead
At present, some of the businesses have
completed necessary internal assessments
so as to set targets and record progress
on key performance indicators. The
implementation of an organisation-wide
integrated sustainability data management
system provides the platform to benchmark
perfomance internally among business units,
as well as monitor data of each business
on resource utilisation and environmental
impact vis-a-vis production. Studies are being
carried out so that business-wise quantified
targets can be progressively defined for
prioritised material environmental aspects.
Systems for performance review against
targets are also being put in place. Going

forward, ITC will also undertake life cycle
assessment studies of more of its products
and services for identifying opportunities to
continuously improve environmental impacts
across the value chain.

Board
approved
Policies such
as those on
Environment,
Health and
Safety, Life Cycle
Sustainability of
Products and
Services and
Responsible
Sourcing, provide
the necessary
direction to
address the direct
impacts of the
Company’s own
operations as well
as progressively
extend the efforts
along the supply
chain.

87

Management
Approach

2. Phased implementation of energy
conservation initiatives and renewable
energy generation projects.

Economic progress and long-term business
sustainability are today threatened by the
challenge of natural resource depletion and
its impacts on long term energy security.
This is manifest in the consistent and sharp
increase in electricity and fuel prices over
the years.

In 2013-14, 38.1% of the total energy
consumption of ITC was met from renewable
energy sources. ITC intends to achieve a
50% renewable energy share by 2020 in a
progressive manner. A detailed study was
carried out during 2013-14 to understand
the issues related to the achievement of this
target, taking into account various businesses
as well as unit-specific aspects like existing
energy portfolio and energy conservation &
renewable energy projects, future expansion
plans, etc. Evolving regulatory frameworks
in each state were also taken into account,
for instance Perform Achieve and Trade (PAT)
mechanism, Renewable Energy Purchase
Obligation, etc. Since the Paperboards and
Specialty Papers Business accounts for 90%

ITC has responded to the evolving energy
scenario in the country by aligning its
corporate strategy so as to ensure:
1. Identification and evaluation of energy
security risks given ITC’s future expansion
plans, evolving regulatory frameworks,
techno-commercial feasibility and sociopolitical aspects.

88

of the Company’s energy consumption, special
attention was paid to its unique requirements.

Break-up of Energy from
Renewable Sources

5.9%

Our Performance
ENERGY CONSUMPTION
WITHIN THE ORGANISATION
In 2013-14, ITC Units consumed 21,433 Terra
Joules (TJ) of energy. Despite significant
growth in almost all businesses (7.8% growth
in production volumes at Paperboards and
Specialty Papers Business itself), there has been
a marginal increase of 0.4% in the total energy
consumption as compared to the previous year
(21,347 TJ in 2012-13). This has been achieved
through better capacity utilisation and concerted
efforts on energy conservation implemented
across several ITC Units.
Sources of Energy in ITC (2013-14)

Energy Purchased from
State Utilities

3.0%

Energy from
Renewable Sources

38.1%

Energy Directly
from Fossil Fuels

58.9%

0.2%

93.9%

Biomass

Wind

Solar

Renewable energy to the extent of 8,175 TJ in
ITC was derived from the following sources:Black liquor waste from pulping process
and waste wood biomass from chipping
operations in the Bhadrachalam Unit and
locally sourced chip/sawdust and deoiled
bran in the Kovai Unit of the Paperboards
and Specialty Papers Business
Wind Energy farms for Packaging & Printing,
Cigarettes, Hotels, Paperboards & Specialty
Papers and Leaf Tobacco Businesses
Break-up of Direct Energy
from Fossil Fuels

7.8%

1.8%

90.4%

Solid Fuel

Liquid Fuel

38.1%
of the total energy
consumption of
ITC was met from
renewable energy
sources

ITC
intends to
achieve a 50%
renewable energy
share by 2020 in
a progressive
manner.

Gaseous Fuel

89

Solar thermal systems in several Units
In 2013-14, the total energy contribution
from renewable sources, decreased by 7.1%
over the previous year (8,802 TJ in 2012-13).

to conventionally designed hotels. ITC hotels
are not only energy efficient by design but
also conserve fossil fuels by maximising
Energy Consumption within
ITC across Businesses:

Renewable Energy Utilisation in ITC
38.5

9000
8000
7000 26.3
6000
5000
4000
3437
3000
2000

30.6
24.1

5909

35.3

30.9

7957

8133

41.2
8802

38.1
8175

2007-08

2008-09

19,264

89.9%

Hotels

612

2.9%

Leaf
Tobacco

421

2.0%

Cigarettes

369

1.7%

Foods &
Personal Care
Products

375

1.7%

Primary contributors to this decline in
renewable energy generation were:-

Packaging
and Printing

293

1.4%

The Paperboards Unit at Bhadrachalam
confronted the challenge of reduced
availability of domestic wood, which led to
a reduction in the production of virgin pulp
and greater dependence on imported pulp.
This in turn resulted in reduced generation
of black liquor which was compensated by
higher coal production.

Others*

99

0.4%

2009-10

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

Total
Percentage of
Renewable Energy (TJ) Total Energy

Substantial
improvements
in specific energy performance
were achieved at
many of the Units
through a focused
approach on energy conservation
through rigorous
third party audits
and implementation of the
recommendations
coupled with
better capacity
utilisation.

90

Energy
%
Businesses consumption Contribution
(in TJ)
to ITC Total

Paperboards
and Specialty
Papers

6622

3571

2006-07

42
36
30
24
18
12
06
00

Reduced consumption of chip/saw dust and
deoiled bran due to availability issues at the
Paperboards Unit in Kovai.
Substantial improvements in specific
energy performance were achieved at many
of the Units through a focused approach
on energy conservation through rigorous
third party audits and implementation
of the recommendations coupled with
better capacity utilisation. As a result of
implementation of energy conservation
measures, a saving of 81.03 TJ in direct energy
consumption and of 45.99 TJ in indirect
energy consumption has been achieved in
2013-14.
The LEED® Platinum rating has been accorded
to all of ITC’s luxury hotels, making it the
greenest luxury hotel chain in the world.
This, in effect, implies a significant reduction
in specific energy consumption with respect

*

Others include Agri Business, ITC Infotech,
ITC Life Sciences & Technology Centre and
large offices

use of wind energy. Several of ITC’s hotels
are sourcing 100% of their electrical energy
requirements from wind farms. In order to
continually reduce our energy footprint,
green features are also being incorporated
in all existing hotels, manufacturing Units,
warehouses and office complexes apart from
all new construction.

Provided below is a snapshot of the Units
where specific energy consumption has

Name of
Unit

Paperboards
and Specialty
Papers Unit
at Kovai

Printing and
Packaging
Unit at
Haridwar

Hotel ITC
Maurya

Cigarette Unit
at Munger

Paperboards
and Specialty
Papers Unit at
Bhadrachalam

improved significantly in 2013-14, over the
previous year:

Specific Energy Consumption in
2012-13

16.63

5.42

0.79

5.37

33.77

2013-14

13.79

Unit of
Percentage
Measurement Reduction

GJ/t

4.74

GJ/t

0.70

GJ/Number of
Guest Room
Nights

4.81

31.25

GJ/MNC eq.*

GJ/t

Remarks

17.1

Improved
capacity
utilisation and
implementation
of energy
conservation
measures

12.5

Improved
capacity
utilisation and
implementation
of energy
conservation
measures

11.4

Implementation
of energy
conservation
measures

10.4

Improved grid
availability and
implementation
of energy
conservation
measures

7.5

Reduction
in pulping
volumes and
implementation
of energy
conservation
measures

The
LEED®
Platinum
rating has been
accorded to all
of ITC’s luxury
hotels, making
it the greenest
luxury hotel
chain in the
world.

Figures are rounded off to nearest decimal
* MNC eq - Million Number of Cigarettes equivalent

91

However, specific energy consumption has
increased in the Units mentioned in the
table below during 2013-14 in comparison
to the previous year. Though these Units
contribute only 1.2% to the overall ITC
energy consumption figures, measures are
being initiated to reverse the trend.
For calculating energy consumption within
the organisation, ITC has followed the World
Resources Institute (WRI) and World Business
Council for Sustainable Development
(WBCSD) ‘GHG Corporate Accounting and

For
calculating
energy
consumption
within the
organisation, ITC
has followed the
WRI and WBCSD
‘GHG Corporate
Accounting and
Reporting
Standard’.

Name of
Unit

Specific Energy Consumption in
2012-13

2013-14

Reporting Standard’. In order to ensure
adoption of uniform methodologies across the
organisation, Standard Operating Procedures
have been laid down, to facilitate quality
control in terms of monitoring, recording
and finally collation, using ITC’s Integrated
Sustainability Data Management System
(ISDMS). Energy factors (Net Calorific Values)
for solid fuels are taken from the actual fueltest reports while for liquid and gaseous fuels,
default factors from the IPCC Guideline for
National Green House Gas Inventories (2006)
have been taken into consideration.
Unit of
Percentage
Measurement Increase

Remarks

Due to ongoing project
activities, parallel
production facilities
being maintained.
23.4 This was a temporary
arrangement and with
commissioning of new
facility in Jan 2014.

Cigarettes
manufacturing
Unit at
Kolkata

1.58

1.95

Personal Care
Products
(Soap)
Unit at Manpura

0.83

1.03

GJ/t

24.1

Change in the
product mix

Foods
(Biscuit) Unit
at Haridwar

3.08

3.66

GJ/t

18.8

Addition of
new product
variants

Packaging and
Printing Unit
at Tiruvottiyur

4.30

5.08

GJ/t

18.1

GJ/MNC eq

Change in the product
mix, new product and
‘label’ and increase in
flexibles

Figures are rounded off to nearest decimal

92

ENERGY CONSUMPTION
OUTSIDE OF THE
ORGANISATION
During 2013-14, ITC has expanded the
boundary of energy accounting, both
upstream and downstream. Accordingly,
1,641 TJ of energy consumed outside of
the organisation has been accounted for in
2013-14 as part of inbound transportation
of raw materials, outbound transportation of
products and wastes, employee commuting,
local road travel by Hotels business guests,
Third Party Manufacturing (TPM) units
catering to the notebooks segment of
Education and Stationery Products Business,
and ATC Limited, an associated company. For
computation methodology, please refer to
Annexure — GHG Inventory: Quantification
Methodologies. The boundary of accounting
will be progressively expanded in the years
to come, based on our ability to overcome
challenges with regard to data quality.

The Road Ahead
Based on a holistic feasibility analysis and
the fact that majority of the Company’s
energy consumption in the entire value chain
of products is attributable to manufacturing
operations, ITC’s businesses will continue
to accord high priority to energy efficiency
projects within a Unit’s premises. ITC
recognises that availability of biomass for fuel
will face increasing competition and while
solar and wind energy can contribute towards
meeting electrical energy requirements,
finding alternatives to fossil fuel for meeting
its thermal energy requirements will be more
challenging. Accordingly specific focus will
be accorded to energy conservation and
efforts will be made to drive the same in a
strategic manner.

ITC’s
businesses
will continue
to accord high
priority to energy
efficiency projects
within a Unit’s
premises.

G4-21

93

Greenhouse
Gases
ITC
firmly
believes that
the future
competitiveness
of organisations
will depend on
their ability to
adopt effective
strategies for
a low carbon
growth path.

94

Management
Approach
ITC firmly believes that the future
competitiveness of organisations will depend
on their ability to adopt effective strategies
for a low carbon growth path. ITC has
responded to the challenges emerging from
the threat of climate change by aligning its
corporate strategy with the National Action
Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC). This has
already been detailed in the ‘Disclosure on
Management Approach’ section.

Our Performance
ITC has computed its greenhouse gas (GHG)
inventory, including GHG emissions, biogenic
carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions and GHG
removals, in accordance with ISO 14064:2006,
which is the latest international standard
specifying principles and requirements at
the organisation level for quantification and
reporting of GHG emissions and removals.
The 2013-14 inventory has been verified
by KPMG at the “Reasonable Assurance”
level. To set organisational boundaries for
consolidated GHG emissions, ITC has utilised
the operational control approach for the
various entities covered under the Report.
Based on applicability, ITC has accounted
for the following gases in its GHG inventory:

Carbon Dioxide (CO2), Methane (CH4),
Nitrous Oxide (N2O), Hydrofluorocarbons
(HFCs), Perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and Sulphur
Hexafluoride (SF6).
In 2013-14, ITC’s total GHG emissions
(Scope 1, 2 &3) were 16,12,914 tonnes of
CO2-equivalent (14,74,558 tonnes in 201213) and CO2 emissions from combustion
of biomass was 7,42,220 tonnes (8,38,969
tonnes in 2012-13). The increase in total
GHG emissions with respect to 2012-13 is
primarily attributable to the following:
Increase in Scope 1 emissions as a result
of increased fossil fuel consumption due
to the reduced availability of bio-mass
in the Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Business, as well as the inclusion of two
new Units, the Mysore Unit of ITC’s Leaf
Tobacco Business and ITC Grand Chola of
ITC’s Hotels Business, within the reporting
boundary (please refer to Energy section in
page 90 for further details)
Increase in Scope 3 emissions owing to
inclusion of emissions from transportation

G4-21

of materials by ITC’s Agri Business Division
and the Mysore Unit of the Leaf Tobacco
Business as well as increased emissions
from transportation of products and
raw materials by ITC’s Paperboards and
Specialty Papers Business.

ITC’s GHG inventory for the year
2013-14 is as follows:

Direct GHG Emissions
(Scope 1)

12,34,128 tonnes

CO2 Emissions
from combustion
of biomass

7,42,220 tonnes

Energy Indirect GHG
Emissions (Scope 2)

1,76,649 tonnes

Other Indirect GHG
Emissions (Scope 3)

2,02,137 tonnes

GHG
Removals

45,29,311 tonnes

ITC has
computed its
greenhouse gas
(GHG) inventory,
including GHG
emissions,
biogenic carbon
dioxide (CO2)
emissions and
GHG removals, in
accordance with
ISO 14064:2006,
which is the latest
international
standard
specifying
principles and
requirements at
the organisation
level for
quantification
and reporting of
GHG emissions
and removals. The
2013-14 inventory
has been verified
by KPMG at the
“Reasonable
Assurance”
level.

95

GHG Emissions and Sequestration

4785

4700

4380

4200

4529
4011

3700

3690

3695

3200
2700
2200
1700
1200
700

2638

2025

1202
1013

1058

1352

2046
1572

1709

1564

1475

1613

1143

1244
311

906

2003-04

2004-05

839

742

2012-13

2013-14

200
2005-06

CO2e Emission
(Scope 1, 2 & 3 - kilotonnes)

2006-07

2007-08

CO2e Sequestered
(kilotonnes)

2008-09

2009-10

2010-11

2011-12

CO2 Emissions from combustion of biomass
(kilotonnes), computed since 2012-13

* Dip in CO2 sequestration in 2010-11 caused by reduced productivity of Eucalyptus plantations due to infestation in some areas and lesser
incremental addition of plantation area.
* Dip in CO2 sequestration numbers in 2012-13 is primarily due to the revision in methodology of computing the CO2 sequestration in order to
comply with ISO 14064:2006 requirements.
* Increase in CO2 sequestration in 2013-14 is primarily due to increase in the planted area of Subabul and Casuarina species as compared to the
previous year.

ITC’s Social and Farm Forestry Initiatives
have added close to 21,000 hectares of
plantations during 2013-14. Total plantations
as on March 31, 2014 stand at over 1,63,000
hectares. The Social and Farm Forestry
Initiatives have helped sequester 45,29,311
tonnes of CO2 in this year, thus consolidating
ITC’s status as a ‘Carbon Positive Company’
for the 9th year in a row.

Total
plantations
as on March 31,
2014 stand at
over 1,63,000
hectares.

From 2013-14 onwards, ITC has started
monitoring the GHG intensity of its
operations, in terms of the Scope 1 and Scope
2 emissions:Specific GHG emissions of Paperboards
and Specialty Papers Business Units, which
together accounted for around 82% of total
GHG emissions (Scope 1 and Scope 2) in ITC,
are given in the table below.

Paperboards and Specialty Papers Business

Name of
Unit

Specific GHG Emissions
(tCO2e/ tonne of production)

Bhadrachalam
Bollaram
Kovai
Tribeni

1.71
0.10
1.08
4.80*

* This Unit specialises in low GSM products and laminates which are energy intensive, and uses fossil fuel
based energy.
96

The specific GHG emissions of ITC’s other
businesses, which contributed to about 16%
of the total GHG emissions (Scope 1 and
Scope 2), are given below.

Unit for
Specific Specific
Business
GHG
GHG
Emissions Emissions
Cigarettes

0.593

tCO2e/
MNC eq

Foods

0.518

tCO2e/
tonne

Packaging and
Printing

0.504

tCO2e/
tonne

Leaf
Tobacco

0.425

tCO2e/
tonne

0.087

tCO2e/
Number of
Guest Room
Nights

Hotels

ITC’s accounting of Scope 1, 2 & 3 GHG
emissions is based on the ‘GHG Protocol
Corporate Accounting and Reporting
Standard’ and the ‘GHG Protocol Corporate
Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting
and Reporting Standard’ issued by the
World Resources Institute (WRI) and the
World Business Council for Sustainable
Development (WBCSD). The standards,
methodologies, tools and assumptions used
for quantification of the GHG emissions
and removals by various sources, have been
explained at length in Annexure – GHG
Inventory: Quantification Methodologies.
ITC’s efforts in energy reduction across
its various Units and the optimisation of
distribution logistics of finished goods for its
FMCG Businesses have helped control GHG
emissions in 2013-14.
In 2013-14, 20,909 tonnes of GHG
emissions (scope 1 & 2) were avoided by
the implementation of energy conservation
measures.
Specific Scope 3 emissions due to
transportation of FMCG products (Cigarettes,
Personal Care and Foods) in 2013-14 have

decreased by 8.1% (tonnes of CO2e emission/
tonne of product transported) as compared
to the previous year for the same product
categories. This has been achieved by
improvement in vehicle utilisation capacity
across the supply chain and extensive
network de-layering in order to increase
direct shipments to destination warehouses,
thereby avoiding intermediate movements.

The Road Ahead
ITC intends to progressively expand the
boundary for monitoring and reporting
of Scope 3 GHG emissions, beyond the
existing coverage of significant Third Party
Manufacturers (TPMs), upstream and
downstream transportation of materials and
employee commuting. Our focus will be to
continuously reduce Specific GHG emissions
in manufacturing operations as well as
transportation of materials.

ITC’s
efforts in
the direction
of energy
reduction in
various Units and
the optimisation
of distribution
logistics of
finished goods
for its FMCG
Businesses have
helped control
GHG emissions
in 2013-14.

In order to spearhead its carbon positive
growth path, ITC plans to set realistic and
tangible targets of reduction in specific
Scope 1 and 2 emissions based on historical
performance as well as future plans. It is
expected that the process of target setting
for each Business and individual Units will be
completed during 2014-15.

OTHER
SIGNIFICANT
AIR EMISSIONS
Management
Approach
Uncontrolled air pollution in terms of
emissions of SOx, NOx, Particulate Matter
etc. may have adverse impacts on vegetation,
health of human beings and animals,
biodiversity as well as crop yields. Cognising
for the adverse impacts of air pollutants on
the ecosystem and the critical need towards
mitigating them, ITC has continued to invest

97

in reducing air emission levels through
adoption of cleaner technologies/fuels,
monitoring of combustion efficiencies and
investment in state-of-the-art pollution
control equipment, such as plasma filters
and electrostatic precipitators.

Our Performance
All our Units monitor significant air emission
parameters, such as Particulate Matter (PM),
Nitrogen Oxides (NOX) and Sulphur Dioxide
(SO2) on a regular basis to ensure compliance
with internal norms that are more stringent
than regulatory requirements.
In 2013-14, total significant air emissions
included 781 tonnes of PM, 776 tonnes of NOX
and 883 tonnes of SO2 emission (in 2012-13,

PM: 690, NOx: 649 and SO2: 790 tonnes). The
increase in the total emissions over last year
was due to the increased utilisation of fossil
fuels in ITC, as a result of reduced availability
of bio-mass.
In 2013-14, PM emission from the
Bhadrachalam Unit was 0.972 kg per BDMT
(Bone-Dry Metric Tonne) of production,
way below the average emission of 3.8 kg
per BDMT by large scale Indian mills as
per the Report by the Centre for Science &
Environment (Source: ‘All About Paper – The
life cycle of Indian Pulp and Paper Industry’,
Green Rating project, 2004).
In 2013-14, the specific NOx emission in the
Unit at Bhadrachalam continued to be lower
than the standards stipulated in European
countries, as illustrated below:

NOx (kg/tonne)
Bhadrachalam 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
0.43

0.69

0.60

0.58

0.46

0.35

0.33

Standards

All our
Units monitor
significant
air emission
parameters, such
as Particulate
Matter (PM),
Nitrogen Oxides
(NOx) and Sulphur
Dioxide (SO2)
on a regular
basis to ensure
compliance with
internal norms
that are more
stringent than
regulatory
requirements.

Sweden

1.2-2.4

EU

1.0-1.8

EU-BAT*

1.0-1.5

Reported Values
CEPI**

0.85

The Bhadrachalam Unit is also progressing towards achieving international standards on
specific SO2 emission levels, as given below:

SO2 (kg/tonne)
Bhadrachalam 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
0.50

0.84

0.79

0.74

0.61

0.53

Standards
Sweden

0.5-1.4

EU

0.1-0.5

EU-BAT*

0.2-0.4

Reported Values
CEPI**

0.24

Sources – 1. Comprehensive Industry Document for Large-Scale Pulp & Paper Mills, study done by CPPRI, 	
	 published by CPCB, 2007
*EU-BAT: EU Norm Best Available technology
2. ** CEPI – Confederation of European Paper Industries, Sustainability Report 2011

98

0.51

international best practices. These norms
are taken into consideration right from
the design stage and include measures for
leakage/spillage prevention, provisions
for containment, impervious flooring, leak
detection system as well as all requirements
as per Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for
hazardous chemicals. To avoid any incidence
of uncontrolled spills or leakage, ITC has
instituted safe work practices on handling
and storage, procedures for leak detection &
spill control and preventive maintenance. The
effectiveness of these measures is checked
on a regular basis.
We also continuously evaluate the feasibility
of substituting hazardous chemicals with less
or non-hazardous materials. In 2013-14, there
was no significant spillage of any chemical,
oil, fuel or hazardous waste in any of our Units.
In addition to the above parameters, our
Paperboards Unit at Bhadrachalam also
monitors Hydrogen Sulphide, the average
measured value of which for the year 201314 was 3.72 mg/Nm3, which was much lower
than the regulatory norm of 10mg/Nm3.
Ozone Depleting Substances: In accordance
with the Government of India’s Ozone
Depleting Substances (ODS) Rules, 2000,
ITC has developed and implemented an ODS
phase out plan. The main features of the plan
include procurement of new equipments
which are free of Chlorofluorocarbons
(CFC), Halons and Methyl Chloroform (MCF);
monitoring and reducing consumption
of ODS; replacement of all the existing
equipment using ODS well before the
stipulated phase-out period and recover all
the ODS from the equipment being replaced
for recycling or safe disposal.

In
accordance
with the
Government of
India’s Ozone
Depleting
Substances (ODS)
Rules, 2000, ITC
has developed
and implemented
an ODS phase
out plan.

The Road Ahead
All Units of ITC would continue to make
concerted efforts in reducing specific
emission levels. Significant reduction in
specific emission levels will be achieved
primarily through use of cleaner fuels,
improvement in energy conservation and
increased utilisation of renewable energy
sources. The details are given in the
Disclosure on Management Approach –
Environment Section.

In 2013-14, the total consumption of ODS by
all our Units was 79.1 kg of CFC-11 equivalent.

Responsible
Management Of
Chemicals, Oils
and Fuels
All our Units manage chemicals, oils and
fuels as per defined ITC norms, which take
into account all statutory requirements and

99

Management
Approach
The
issue of water
availability
assumes critical
significance in
light of the fact
that agriculture
in India, which
provides
employment to
over 50% of
the workforce,
is largely rain
fed.

100

The availability of water continues to be
a serious concern across the world. This
problem will be further aggravated in India
in the coming years, leading to a difficult and
turbulent future arising out of severe water
stress, as highlighted by the 2014 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Report. The issue of water availability
assumes critical significance in light of the
fact that agriculture in India, which provides
employment to over 50% of the workforce,
is largely rain fed, with around 55% of net
sown area meeting its water requirements
from rainwater alone. Given the social and
historical context of farming in India and the
absence of adequate infrastructural support,
any significant disruption in rainfall patterns

will have considerable adverse impacts
on agricultural yields. Such an untenable
situation may even threaten the very fabric
of social stability. Water availability therefore
becomes especially critical for a Company
like ITC, as most of its businesses depend
significantly on agri-inputs.
Increased water scarcity may also impact ITC’s
Paperboards and Specialty Papers Business
which is relatively more water intensive in
its operations. With continuous decline in
ground water and uneven supply of surface
water, it may become even more challenging
for businesses to meet their requirements.
Another issue that is assuming alarming
proportions is the fact that disruptions
in rainfall patterns will also impact
water quality. Increased ground water
mining is exacerbating an issue that has
already assumed critical dimensions due

to contamination as well as inadequate
recharge. Such poor quality water requires
additional treatment and additional costs
before it can become usable. Risk of localised
contamination like arsenic, fluoride, etc.,
which is already prevalent in some of the
states where ITC operates, is also expected
to increase. Such contamination can lead
to severe health hazards and thus can have
significant impacts.
These challenges may bring about additional
regulatory limits on water withdrawal. These
are already being enforced in some of the States
where ITC operates and may affect operations
due to a decrease in water availability.
Recognising the daunting challenges
arising out of water-stress, ITC has adopted
the following strategies that focus on the
replenishment as well as conservation of this
precious natural resource.

1. ASSESSMENT OF WATER 		
	 STRESS AT ITC UNITS
ITC has undertaken the evaluation
of water availability/ stress through

‘India Water Tool’ which will further help
in the assessment of water related risks at
the site-level.

2. WATER CONSERVATION
Conducting water audits, benchmarking
and implementation of best practices
to achieve the lowest possible specific
freshwater intake (water per unit of
product/service).

3. ZERO EFFLUENT 			
	 DISCHARGE
Treating effluent so as to ensure that
discharge quality is better than statutory
requirements and progressing towards
recycling/ reusing of all treated effluent.

4. RAIN WATER HARVESTING
Enhancing our water positive footprint
through rainwater harvesting, both
within our own Units and across different
watershed areas.

ITC
has adopted
strategies that
focus on the
replenishment
as well as
conservation of
water.

stakeholder engagements and on the
basis of data available with Government
agencies. ITC is also engaged with
World Business Council for Sustainable
Development (WBCSD) in developing the

5. WATER STEWARDSHIP
Work has been initiated on a pilot basis at
one of our Units to work towards meeting
the water security needs of all stakeholders

101

at the local watershed level. This has been
undertaken based on the principles of
the Alliance for Water Stewardship (AWS)
Standard. Based on the learning and
outcomes, this will be extended across
other business units as well.

Focused
efforts of
all Units to
reduce intake
by conducting
water audits,
benchmarking
and adopting
leading practices
facilitated the
reduction
of specific
freshwater
intake.

102

Our Performance

benchmarking and adopting leading
practices facilitated the reduction of specific
water intake as illustrated in the following
sections.

Water Sources
Sources of Water
in ITC (2013-14)

Water Conservation
In 2013-14, ITC Units withdrew 33.73 million
kilolitres (kl) of freshwater, an increment of
4.9% over the previous year (32.15 million kl
in 2012-13). The increase in total fresh water
intake can be attributed to the increased
production of 7.8% by the Paperboards
and Specialty Papers Business (accounting
for around 92% of the total fresh water
withdrawal by ITC), and inclusion of both the
Mysore Unit of the Company’s Leaf Threshing
Business and ITC Grand Chola Chennai, of
the Hotels Business into the reporting
boundary. Focused efforts of all Units to
reduce intake by conducting water audits,

78.7%

Surface Water

2.7%

Municipal Water
and Others

18.6%

Ground Water

Of the 33.73 million kl of fresh water
withdrawn, 78.7% of water resources were
sourced from rivers, 18.6% from ground
water sources and only 2.7% from municipal
and other water sources.
This year, the Paperboards & Specialty Papers
mills at Bhadrachalam, Kovai & Tribeni
together accounted for 92.4% of the total
fresh water withdrawal by ITC.

Paperboards Unit
at Bhadrachalam
India’s largest integrated paper and
paperboards mill accounted for 74.6% of the
total fresh water intake in ITC. In 2013-14, the
Bhadrachalam Unit’s freshwater intake was
45.1 kl per tonne of product, a reduction of
2.8% over last year’s 46.4 kl/tonne, primarily
due to various water conservation initiatives
undertaken by the Unit. It is worth mentioning
that this surpasses the proposed benchmark

standard of 63 kl/tonne by the National
Productivity Council (NPC), for large-scale
integrated pulp and paper mills. (Reference:
Final Report on Development of Guidelines for
Water Conservation in Pulp and Paper Sector
by NPC, New Delhi, March 2006).

Specific Fresh Water Intake in Bhadrachalam Unit (kl/tonne)

140
121
120
99
100
88
80

60

88

79

86
76

76

70

70

72
55

50

48

46

45

40

20

0
1998- 1999- 2000- 2001- 2002- 2003- 2004- 2005- 2006- 2007- 2008- 2009- 2010- 2011- 2012- 20131999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

103

The Unit
has achieved
a 55.8%
reduction of
specific freshwater
intake per tonne
of product during
the reporting
period, in
comparison to
1998-99.

Specialty Papers
Unit at Tribeni
ITC’s Unit at Tribeni manufactures specialty
paper, which is a water intensive process.
The Unit has achieved around 56% reduction
of specific freshwater intake per tonne of
product during the reporting period, in
comparison to 1998-99. However, there is an
increase of 6.3% in the specific freshwater
intake over the previous year primarily due
to the commissioning activities of the new
power plant. Additional efforts are underway
to achieve further reduction in specific
freshwater intake in the Unit.

Specific Fresh Water Intake in Tribeni Mill (kl/tonne)

300
259
250

233

226

213

200
178
150
128
107
100

120
105

99

106

117

124

116

108

115

50

0
1998- 1999- 2000- 2001- 2002- 2003- 2004- 2005- 2006- 2007- 2008- 2009- 2010- 2011- 2012- 20131999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

Paperboards Unit
at Kovai
The specific freshwater intake (kl/tonne)
in the Paperboards & Specialty Papers Unit
at Kovai was 34.6% lower than the specific

104

fresh water intake during 2006-07 (the Unit
was acquired by ITC in March 2004 and
data compilation was started from 200607 onwards). Various water conservation
measures undertaken by the Unit during the
year led to the reduction in specific fresh
water intake from 15.94 kl/tonne in 2012-13
to 13.75 kl/tonne in 2013-14.

Specific Fresh Water Intake in Kovai (kl/tonne)

25

20

21.01
13.1

17.31

15

15.31

16.65

15.94

13.97

13.75

10

05

00
20062007

20072008

20082009

20092010

20102011

20112012

20122013

20132014

This specific freshwater intake of 13.75 kl/tonne surpasses the proposed benchmark standard
of 19 kl/tonne set by NPC in New Delhi in 2006 for this category of paper mills.

105

In addition, the following Units have reported significant reduction in specific freshwater
intake in 2013-14 as compared to 2012-13:-

Specific freshwater intake
Unit of
%
Measurement 2012-13 2013-14
Reduction

Business

Unit

Cigarettes

Pune

kl/MNC
equivalent

7.0

4.2

40.0

Cigarettes

Munger

kl/MNC
equivalent

4.4

3.9

11.4

Personal
Care
Products

Soap
and Talc,
Haridwar

kl/tonne

1.8

1.3

27.8

Foods

Snacks
and
Noodles,
Haridwar

kl/tonne

3.6

2.9

19.4

Hotel

Sheraton
New Delhi

kl/Number
of Room
Nights

1.5

1.2

20.0

Hotel

ITC
Maratha

kl/Number
of Room
Nights

1.5

1.4

6.7

Hotel

ITC
Windsor

kl/Number
of Room
Nights

1.4

1.3

7.1

Leaf
Tobacco

Anaparti

kl/tonne

2.3

2.0

13.0

Figures are rounded off to nearest decimal

106

Primary
Factors

Water
conservation
measures

Improved
capacity
utilisation
or change in
product mix
and water
conservation
measures

The following Units have reported significant increment in specific freshwater intake
in 2013-14 as compared to 2012-13:-

Specific freshwater intake
Unit of
%
Measurement 2012-13 2013-14
Increase

Business

Unit

Packaging
and
Printing

Haridwar

Personal
Care
Products

Soap,
Manpura

kl/tonne

ITC Gardenia

kl/Number
of Guest
Room Nights

Hotel

kl/tonne

2.7

1.0

1.3

3.8

1.3

1.6

Primary
Factors

40.7

Water use in project
activities in the new
‘Integrated Packaging Unit’

30.0

Commencement of a new
product line that has a
comparatively higher water
requirement

23.1

Leakage in treated grey
water line, which was later
rectified

Cigarettes

Kidderpore

kl/MNC
equivalent

1.9

2.3

21.0

Increase in domestic water
consumption owing to
increased workforce and
trial runs of new facilities
and project activities

Cigarettes

Saharanpur

kl/MNC
equivalent

4.0

4.5

12.5

Decrease in production
volumes

Figures are rounded off to nearest decimal

107

Effluent Discharge
ITC is committed to achieving zero effluent
discharge through treating and recycling of
all wastewater and harvesting of rainwater
on its properties. This not only reduces fresh
water intake but also maximises groundwater
recharge, reduces run-off etc.
Many ITC Units have already achieved the
goal of zero effluent discharge outside the
Unit premises. These include: Cigarette
Factories at Bengaluru, Saharanpur & Pune,
Leaf Processing Units at Anaparti, Chirala
& Mysore, Packaging & Printing Unit at
Tiruvottiyur, Life Sciences & Technology
Centre at Bengaluru, Research Centre at
Rajahmundry, Paperboards and Specialty
Papers Business Units at Kovai and Bollaram,
Personal Care Products Business Unit at
Manpura, Lifestyle Retailing Business Unit at
Manesar, Hotels Unit ITC Rajputana at Jaipur,
and ITC Green Centre at Gurgaon.
In 2013-14, a total volume of 23.9 million kl
of treated effluent was discharged outside
the premises by ITC units, out of which 66.6%
was used for irrigation by communities in
the vicinity. In a nation now confronted with
the growing challenges of water security,
this treated effluent is a resource that the
neighbouring communities increasingly rely
upon to meet their irrigation requirements.

Municipal
Sewers

32.4%

Surface
Water Bodies

250

250
200

137

0.6%

300

Treated Effluent Quality:
Annual Average (2013-14) - Paperboards and
Specialty Papers Units

175

Treated Effluent Discharge
by Destination

The two Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Units at Bhadrachalam and Tribeni accounted
for 98.64% of total wastewater discharged
outside the Unit premises in ITC. The quality
of the treated effluent from these Units was
far better than the stipulated standards, as
depicted below:

89

150

100

Many
ITC Units
have already
achieved the
goal of zero
effluent discharge
outside the Unit
premises.

Common Effluent
Treatment Plant

66.6%

Irrigation
(outside premises)

0

16

0.4%

24
08
08
30

50

39

61

100

BOD
Bhadrachalam

COD
Kovai

Tribeni

TSS
National Standard

All units in mg/l and figures rounded off to nearest digit
BOD - Biochemical oxygen demand
COD - Chemical oxygen demand
TSS - Total suspended solids
108

The Bhadrachalam and Tribeni Units have
also maintained standards that are well
within the norms prescribed by the Corporate
Responsibility for Environmental Protection
(CREP), a voluntary charter by the Ministry of
Environment & Forests and Central Pollution
Control Board for large pulp and paper
manufacturing units with respect to specific
treated effluent discharge.

The
Bhadrachalam
and Tribeni
Units have also
maintained
standards that are
well within the
norms prescribed
by the Corporate
Responsibility for
Environmental
Protection
(CREP).

The National Productivity Council (NPC)’s
Report on ‘Proposed Standard for Pulp
and Paper Industries in India’ suggests
a benchmark standard of 50 kl/tonne of
specific treated effluent discharge for the
integrated pulp and paper industry. This
is applicable to our Paperboards Unit at
Bhadrachalam. The current level of 41.8 kl/
tonne at the Bhadrachalam Unit surpasses
the above proposed benchmark.
Specific Treated Effluent Discharge in ITC Paperboards and Specialty Papers Units (kl/tonne)

CREP Norm

59.2

71.1

72.5

59.8

63.7

63.0

40

41.8

43.4

45.0

44.9

48.0

59.6

63.9

59.1

60

74.4

80

68.5

100

20

00
Bhadrachalam
2006-07

2007-08

Tribeni
2008-09

Similarly, the above report suggests a
benchmark standard of 15m3/tonne for
wastepaper-based pulp and paper mills.
ITC’s Unit at Kovai, which falls under the

2009-10

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

wastepaper-based pulp and paper mills
category, did not discharge any treated
effluent outside its premises this year.

109

As on
March 31,
2014, ITC’s
Integrated
Watershed
Development
Projects,
covering nearly
1,49,000 hectares
of land, support
the Water Positive
status of the
Company for
the 12th year
in a row.

Specific AOX Levels in Bhadrachalam Unit (kg/tonne)

0.012
0.01

0.0110

0.0109 *
0.0087 *

0.0083
0.0074

0.008

0.0051

0.006
0.004

0.0006

2010-11

2011-12

0.002
00
2006-07

2007-08

2008-09

2009-10

2012-13

2013-14

* Variations in AOX levels are due to change in process and product mix

In the current year, the Adsorbable
Organic Halides (AOX) level (applicable
only to the Bhadrachalam Unit) was
0.0109 kg/tonne of product, which is well
below the norm stipulated by Ministry of
Environment and Forests (MOEF), national
and international benchmark figures as
depicted below:
MOEF, National and International Benchmark
Standards for Specific AOX Levels in kg/tonne

kg/tonne
MOEF standard

1

Indian Paper/
Paperboard mills *

0.46-0.8

European
Paper Industries #

0.029

World Bank
Standard **

0.25

* Average as per Comprehensive Industry Document
for Large-Scale Paper Mills, study conducted by
Central Pulp and Paper Research Institute, 2007
# CEPI (Confederation of European Paper Industries),
Sustainability Report 2011
** World Bank Guideline for New Paper Mills (2007)

110

0.0024

Enlarging a Water
Positive Footprint
The Company’s continued interventions in
rainwater harvesting both in the Company
premises and socially relevant watershed areas
has enlarged our water positive footprint.
As on March 31, 2014, ITC’s Integrated Watershed
Development Projects, covering nearly 1,49,000
hectares of land, support the Water Positive
status of the Company for the 12th year in a row.
The total rainwater harvesting potential created
by the Company so far is over two times the net
water consumption by our operations.

Water Balance 2002- 2003- 2004- 2005- 2006- 2007- 2008- 2009- 2010- 2011- 2012- 2013at ITC
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
Fresh Water Intake

24.1

22.48

24.98

25.58

25.79

27.46

32.72

29.96

29.36

29.02

32.15

33.73

Treated Effluents
Discharge

14.64

14.04

19.55

20.96

19.58

18.92

24.52

23.41

22.21

22.80

22.89

23.90

Percentage of
treated effluent
utilised for
irrigation by nearby
community

**

**

86.90

86.80

80.50

79.40

72.30

84.80

60.70

68.50

71.68

66.61

Net Water
Consumption

9.49

8.44

5.43

4.62

6.21

8.54

8.20

6.55

7.15

6.22

9.26

9.83

RWH Potential
Created Within
ITC Units

0.24

0.39

0.34

0.61

0.47

0.42

0.50

0.42

0.92

0.67

0.67

0.77

RWH Potential
Created Through
Watershed Projects
(Cumulative
for that Year)

12.50

15.67

16.52

18.99

23.12

25.42

19.43

20.18

18.97

20.38

20.80

22.50

Total RWH
Potential Created
(For the Year)

12.74

16.06

16.86

19.60

23.59

25.84

19.93* 20.60* 19.89* 21.05* 21.47* 23.27*

*

‘RWH potential’ figures account for silt deposits in various watershed structures. The adjustments are based on actual sample measurement & the
extent of silt deposit depends on the age & location of a structure

**

Not available
All figures in million kl, except percentage

The Road Ahead
As water stress is a major risk for many of our
Businesses, ITC plans to carry out appropriate
hydrological studies at identified water
stressed Units to develop a comprehensive
understanding of these issues. A pilot study
to this effect has been initiated at one of our
Units to achieve the following objectives:
Phase I: Detailed assessment of water
usage and water quality inside the Unit’s
premises to comprehend the minimum
freshwater withdrawal required to operate
the plant. This phase has been completed
and measures to optimise water usage are
being implemented.

Phase II: Evaluation of water withdrawal
and wastewater discharge impacts at the
local watershed level. This will enable the
Company to understand the impacts of
withdrawal from source and discharge of
treated effluents by all stakeholders. The
specific interventions necessary for ensuring
water security for all stakeholders within
the defined watershed area can then be
identified. This study is presently underway.
Once the final recommendations are available,
ITC will engage with other stakeholders to
implement necessary projects.

As
water stress
is a major risk
for many of our
Businesses, ITC
plans to carry
out appropriate
hydrological
studies at
identified water
stressed Units
to develop a
comprehensive
understanding of
these issues.

111

Management
Approach
The issue of waste management has assumed
critical significance for the country today.
Rapid urbanisation, increasing population,
higher consumption levels and inadequate
infrastructure are putting a severe strain
on the ecology. A large amount of wastes
being generated today end up in landfills.
Apart from the increasing pressures on
natural resources, the issue of burgeoning
waste also contributes to soil & groundwater
contamination and Greenhouse Gas (GHG)
emissions, leading to serious concerns of
public health, sanitation as well as large
scale environmental degradation.

112

Often considered to be only an urban
phenomenon, inadequate waste management
today threatens the quality of life throughout
India. Heaps of unattended waste, foraged by
cattle and rag-pickers alike, have become a
common sight both in urban and rural areas
of the country.
In alignment with ITC’s commitment to
reduce its environmental impact and create
a positive ecological footprint, the Company
has adopted the following approaches on
waste management:

1. RESOURCE CONSERVATION
All ITC Units are mandated to reduce
specific waste generation through
constant monitoring and improvement of
efficiencies in material utilisation.

2. SEGREGATION AT SOURCE
All ITC Units are required to ensure
that wastes are segregated at source
in accordance with Company-defined
guidelines. This ensures maximum reuse
and recycling of waste.

3. TOWARDS 100% RECYCLING
Each category of waste is individually
addressed and tracked to ensure that it
can be reused wherever possible, and if
not, recycled. This ensures that almost
no waste from our businesses lands up in
municipal or private landfills.

4. CREATING A POSITIVE
ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT
ITC’s Paper and Paperboards Units are
encouraged to increase the utilisation
of externally generated wastepaper as a
source of fibre instead of virgin fibre. Apart
from the direct environmental benefits of
reduced consumption of power, water and
chemicals, this leads to the additional
public benefit of encouraging better
municipal waste management.
Business-wise Break-up of Wastes Generated
in ITC (2013-14)

Paperboards and
Specialty Papers

Resource
Conservation
In 2013-14, ITC Units generated 7,11,887
tonnes of waste (6,82,405 tonnes in 2012-13).
This 4.3 % increase over last year in total waste
generated was due to increased production by
the Paperboards and Specialty Papers Division
(up 7.8%), a business that contributes to 90.8%
of the total waste generated by ITC’s operations.
The increase can also be attributed to the
inclusion of data from the Mysore Unit of ITC’s
Leaf Tobacco Business and ITC Grand Chola of
ITC’s Hotels Division. However, many business
Units have reduced their specific waste
generation performance (waste generated per
unit of product/service).
ITC’s Unit at Bhadrachalam, which accounts
for 76.2% of the total waste generated in
ITC, has reduced specific waste generation to
1,044 kg per tonne of paper and paperboard in
2013-14 from 1,111 kg per tonne in 2012-13.
According to the Centre for Science and
Environment Report, ‘All About Paper’ (2004),
similar paper mills generate around 1,200 kg
of solid waste per tonne of product.

All
ITC Units
are required
to ensure that
wastes are
segregated
at source in
accordance with
Company-defined
guidelines. This
ensures maximum
reuse and
recycling of
waste.

A few examples of other ITC Units which
achieved significant reduction in specific
waste generation are given on the next page.

90.8%

Packaging and Printing

3.1%

Leaf Tobacco

2.8%

Cigarettes

1.3%

Foods and Personal Care
Products

1.2%

Hotels

0.7%

Others (Offices, ITC
Infotech, Lifestyle Retailing)

0.1%

113

Specific Waste Generation

Unit of
Measurement

Percentage
Reduction

3.3

kg/Number of
Room Nights

53.5

3.3

kg/Number of
Room Nights

51.5

6.5

3.3

kg/Number of
Room Nights

49.2

ITC
Maratha

11.3

6.9

kg/Number of
Room Nights

38.9

WelcomHotel
Sheraton
New Delhi

2.0

1.7

kg/Number of
Room Nights

15.0

Business

Unit

Hotels

2012-13

2013-14

ITC
Mughal

7.1

Hotels

ITC
Rajputana

6.8

Hotels

ITC
Sonar

Hotels
Hotels

Foods
Snacks
Unit

Haridwar

101.2

89.1

kg/tonne

12.0

Primary
Factors

Process
improvement
and waste
reduction
programmes

Improved
capacity
utilisation
and process
improvement

Figures are rounded off to nearest decimal

On the other hand, the following Units have
reported significant increase in specific
waste generation. Though these Units

Business

Unit

Specific Waste Generation

contribute to only 5.2% of the total waste
generated within ITC, requisite measures are
being implemented to address this issue.

2012-2013

2013-2014

Unit of
Measurement

Percentage
Increase

Primary
Factors

Cigarettes

Kidderpore

0.04

0.15

t/MNCeq

275.0

Cigarettes

Pune

0.06

0.15

t/MNCeq

150.0

Cigarettes

Munger

0.11

0.15

t/MNCeq

36.4

Cigarettes

Saharanpur

0.10

0.13

t/MNCeq

27.3

Foods

Biscuits, Haridwar

92.1

135.2

kg/tonne

46.8

Trial runs for new products and
introduction of new product
variants

Packaging and
Printing

Munger

205.5

270.1

kg/tonne

31.4

Disposal of one time rain
damaged paperboards

Packaging and
Printing

Haridwar

250.4

314.1

kg/tonne

25.4

Start-up of new product lines in the
new ‘Integrated Packaging Unit’

Personal Care
Products

Soap,
Manpura

20.9

25.7

kg/tonne

22.9

New product line
commissioning activities

Paperboards
and Specialty
Papers

Kovai

179.7

209.5

kg/tonne

16.6

In the previous year, Corrugated
Fibreboard Container (CFC)
waste was not considered as it
was recycled at Leaf Tobacco
Business. This year CFC recycling
has been done locally and hence
included in the waste quantity.

Increased procurement of
domestic waste paper as raw
material and consequent
increase in miscellaneous wastes,
and change in product mix

Figures are rounded off to nearest decimal

114

Item

Quantity
(tonnes)

Disposal

20047

To authorised recyclers

19

Authorised Landfill

3

In-house Storage

430

Decontaminated and returned
to original suppliers

304

To authorised recyclers

1

In-house storage

7

Incinerated

82

Returned to original suppliers for recycling

13

In-house storage

103

Recycled

284

Incinerated/or sent to authorised landfills/
stored within the Unit

2

Incinerated/Autoclaved

17

Recycled

3

In-house storage

Sludge from effluent
treatment plant of
Paperboards and
Specialty Papers factories
Empty containers of
hazardous chemicals
Used oil/ waste
contaminated with oil/oil
soaked cotton waste

Used lead acid batteries
Spent solvents/ink/ink
sludge/adhesives/ Process
waste/Chemical sludge/
Sludge from fuel tanks
Biomedical waste
(from medical centres
within our units)
E - Waste

Segregation of
Waste
Of the total waste generated at ITC, only 2.9%
by weight can be categorised as hazardous
waste as per Indian statutes. In 2013-14,
98.4% of this hazardous waste was recycled
by external agencies (as illustrated above).
The balance 1.6% was disposed of or stored
completely in accordance with applicable
statutes. In addition, apart from hazardous
wastes transported to external treatment
sites by authorised transport agencies as
applicable, no other hazardous wastes were
transported between locations owned or
managed by the organisation.
All ITC Units have established systems and
procedures to verify the authorisations and
licenses of hazardous waste recyclers in order
to ensure that these wastes are transported,
recycled or disposed of in compliance with
regulations and norms. Corporate EHS

verifies compliance in each of the Units on a
periodic basis.

99.9%
of waste generated
by ITC Units is
recycled

Focussed
attention on
identifying and
tracking of all
waste streams
as well as their
characterisation
and quantification
have helped
ensure the
recycling of 99.9%
of the total waste
generated in all
ITC business
Units.

Waste Destination
The illustration below depicts the final
destinations of total wastes generated during
2013-14:
Total waste and its destination (2013-14)

711887
Total
Waste

711033#
Reused/
Recycled

769*
Incineration +
Landfill

85
On-site
storage

#	 Wastes reused/recycled include 8375 tonnes of waste composted. (All above Units
are in Tonnes)
*	 Includes mainly hazardous waste and construction waste from project activities. We
are exploring solutions for recycling and reuse of the same.

115

Personal Care Business Units at Haridwar.

Focussed attention on identifying and
tracking of all waste streams as well as their
characterisation and quantification have
helped ensure the recycling of 99.9% of the
total waste generated in all ITC business
Units. It is noteworthy that in 2013-14,
ITC’s Unit at Bhadrachalam, which is India’s
largest integrated Paper & Paperboards mill,
together with the following Units managed to
recycle 99.9% of the waste generated.

Foods Business Units at Haridwar (Snacks)
and Pune (Snacks and Noodles).
Leaf Tobacco processing Units at Chirala
and Mysore.
Research Centre at Rajahmundry.
ILTD Divisional Head Office in Guntur.
ITC Green Centre at Gurgaon.

Cigarette factories at Munger, Bengaluru,
Saharanpur, Kolkata and Pune.

Hotels: ITC Maurya, ITC Maratha, ITC Grand
Central, ITC Windsor, ITC Mughal, ITC
Gardenia, ITC Sonar, ITC Rajputana and
WelcomHotel Sheraton New Delhi.

Paperboards and Specialty Papers Units
at Tribeni.

Progress on Waste Recycling

800
700
600
500

93.1
80.7

400
300

281

98.9

78.7

315

98.8

99.8
579

99.8

99.9

638

663

99.8
682

99.9
712

90.0
80.0
70.0

490
304

100.0

60.0
50.0

353

40.0
30.0

200

20.0

100

10.0

00

0.0
2004-05

2005-06

2006-07

Waste Generated in kilotonnes

2007-08

2008-09

2009-10

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

Percentage Recycling
In 2013-14, ITC also generated 3,28,029
tonnes of fly ash, (46% of total waste in ITC),
100% of which has been utilised for brick
making and cement manufacturing.

Waste Used as Raw
Materials
As evident above, the high degree of recycling
achieved across ITC, together with the use
of post-consumer waste by the Paperboards
and Specialty Paper Units at Kovai and
Bhadrachalam, has enabled the Company to
further expand its waste recycling footprint.

116

2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
Total Waste
Generated 3,52,970
(tonnes)

4,90,180

5,78,865 6,38,405 6,63,796 6,82,405 7,11,887

5,77,766 6,37,452 6,62,978 6,81,129 7,11,033

Waste
Recycled
(tonnes)

3,49,264

4,84,287

Percentage
Recycled

98.9

98.8

99.8

99.8

99.9

99.8

99.9

Un-recycled
3,706
waste (tonnes)

5,893

1,099

953

818

1276

854

External
Wastes used
as Raw
1,63,245
Materials
(tonnes)
Waste
Recycling
Footprint (%) *

145

1,25,337

1,25,931 1,19,002 1,15,414 1,18,462 1,09,998

124

122

119

117

117

115

*Waste Recycling Footprint (%): (Waste Recycled + external waste
used as raw material) x 100/Total waste generated in ITC

Waste from Supply The Road Ahead
Chain
ITC will continue to focus on improving
As a preliminary step, ITC has accounted
for the waste generated in 2013-14 from
the operations of exclusive third party
manufacturing units catering to the
notebooks segment of ITC’s Education and
Stationery Products Business, as well as
ATC Limited, our associate company. This
information is detailed below. This coverage
will be progressively expanded in the future.

Total
Supply
Waste
%
Chain
Generated
Recycled
Members (in tonnes)
Exclusive
TPM
Units for
Notebooks
segment

2625

95.9

ATC
Limited

616

99.9

G4-21

material efficiencies and reducing specific
waste generation in addition to continued
efforts on total recycling of waste generated
within its premises. In line with ITC’s Policies
on Life-Cycle Sustainability and Responsible
Sourcing, ITC will engage with supply chain
partners to build awareness in reducing or
recycling of waste generated in the years to
come. The existing Wealth out of Waste (WOW)
programme will be expanded to address the
issue of sustainable livelihoods for people
engaged informally in the waste business,
while at the same time providing a solution to
tackle the challenge of post-consumer waste.
In addition, as part of the WOW initiative, ITC
is also exploring the usability of compact
boards made out of plastic waste (the
dominant component in municipal wastes)
for furniture, etc. Field trials for the same are
currently underway. Based on the results of
these field trials, commercial applications
for these compact boards will be taken up in
a phased manner. This would go a long way
in further augmenting the incomes of people
informally engaged in waste management.

ITC will
continue
to focus on
improving
material
efficiencies and
reducing specific
waste generation
in addition
to continued
efforts on total
recycling of waste
generated within
its premises.

117

Management
Approach

3. Services

ITC’s products and services can be broadly
classified into the following categories:

Since ITC is vertically integrated to a
large extent, it provides opportunities for
successive value addition within the system
for several categories of products such as
paperboards for packaging. This integration
provides the Company unique opportunities
to establish synergies thereby minimising
environmental impact through the optimum
utilisation of raw materials, recycling/ reuse
of wastes as well as optimum logistics and
transportation. These synergies, significantly
reduces the environmental footprint of ITC’s
products and services.

1. FMCG (B to C) Products
Cigarettes, Foods, Personal Care
Products, Education and Stationery
products, Matches and Agarbatti.

2. INDUSTRIAL SUPPLIES AND 	
	 EXPORTS
Paper, Paperboards, Packaging, Leaf
Tobacco, etc.

118

Hoteliering and Information Technology.

We have completed studies on life cycle
assessment of some of our products in Paper,
Paperboards & Packaging and Lifestyle
Retailing Businesses. This has helped in

identifying broad areas for improvements
as well as building internal competencies to
enable us to expand these studies to other
products and services.
All ITC Units continue to pursue efficient use
of natural resources through extensive R&D
and waste elimination/reduction through
process management. In addition, the
recent Board approved Policies on Life Cycle
Sustainability and Responsible Sourcing now
provide the necessary focus on sustainable
sourcing of raw materials to ensure their
long-term availability. These policies will be
implemented across all Businesses starting
2014-15 in a phased manner.

Performance
A very significant proportion of raw
materials in ITC businesses are sourced
from agricultural farms and plantations. Our
initiatives in developing large scale social
and farm forestry plantations, integrated
watershed management and empowering
marginal farmers have all helped in

improving the overall sustainability of the
value chain. In 2013-14, ITC consumed over
29,00,000 tonnes of materials, out of which
close to 98% were from agricultural farms
and plantations which are renewable.

Responsible
Sourcing of Wood
Fibre
Wood is a major source of fibre for the paper
and paperboards industry. Availability of
wood remains a challenge and can be a
serious sustainability concern, especially in
a country with limited natural resources and
acute income inequities.
In 2013-14, approximately 48% of the total
fibre requirements of ITC’s Paperboards and
Specialty Papers Division was met by the pulp
manufactured at Bhadrachalam, another 22%
came from recycled fibre, processed at ITC’s
Units in Kovai and Bhadrachalam, and the
balance 30% was imported pulp. For wood
pulp manufactured at the Bhadrachalam Unit,

In
2013-14, ITC
consumed over
29,00,000 tonnes
of materials, out
of which close to
98% were from
agricultural farms
and plantations
which are
renewable.

119

72% of the wood was sourced from our
social and farm forestry initiatives, while the
balance 28% wood was sourced from known
and legal domestic and imported supplies.
100% of the fibre used for operations at the
Kovai Unit was sourced from recycled fibre.
Internal R&D has produced high yielding,
site specific, disease resistant eucalyptus
and subabul clones supported by extensive
knowledge of plantation management
practices which provide a robust foundation
for the social and farm forestry programme.
During the year, ITC distributed 138 million
high quality saplings to farmers and close
to 21,000 additional hectares were planted
under ITC’s social and farm forestry initiatives.
Apart from the obvious benefits of increasing
the green cover, plantation on wastelands
under the social forestry programme also
directly contributes to in-situ moisture
conservation, ground water recharge and
significant reduction in topsoil losses caused
by wind and water erosion. In addition, as a
result of the leaf litter from multi-species
plantations and the promotion of leguminous
intercrops, erstwhile degraded soils are being
constantly enriched.

Internal
R&D has
produced
high yielding,
site specific,
disease resistant
eucalyptus and
subabul clones
supported
by extensive
knowledge
of plantation
management
practices which
provide a robust
foundation for
the social and
farm forestry
programme.

120

Forest Stewardship
Council
Certifications
All the four Units of ITC’s Paperboards and
Specialty Papers Division i.e Bhadrachalam,
Bollaram, Kovai and Tribeni, which received the
prestigious ‘FSC Chain of Custody’ Certification
in 2009, are maintaining their status.
The FSC (Forest Stewardship Council) is an
independent, non-governmental, not-forprofit organisation established to promote
the responsible management of the world’s
forests and is recognised as the gold standard
in the wood certification for ethical and legal
sourcing. The FSC is represented in more than
107 countries around the world, and is the
most widely accepted and respected amongst
forest product certification schemes.
ITC’s Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Division can now supply FSC certified
paper /paperboards from all its four Units
with the FSC claim of ‘FSC Mixed’ or ‘FSC
Recycled’. The FSC logo endorses that the
product/packaging is from legal, sustainable
and well managed sources and thereby
provides confidence to customers. The

For
sustainable
sourcing of
wood pulp, ITC is
planning to bring
in more plantation
areas under the
FSC – Forest
Management
certification in
future.
FSC certification for ITC’s Paperboards
and Specialty Papers Units exemplifies the
organisation’s continued commitment to
sustainable business practices and to the
building of an inclusive and secure future for
its stakeholders.
In continuation of its commitment to
expand its scope, the organisation, till date,
has facilitated the certification of 22,804
hectares of plantations owned by more than
24,000 small and marginal farmers under the
FSC Forest Management Certification.

Agri-commodities
ITC’s Agri Business primarily engages in
sourcing of agri-commodities like wheat,
coffee, potato, shrimps, soya and processed
fruits, sourced and supplied based on
customer requirements of quality, quantity
and packaging. Consistent investments
are made towards strengthening capability
through
multiple
sourcing
models,
customised and identity preserved supply
chain infrastructure and network, processing
and warehousing tie-ups and technology
enabled systems and processes. The Business
also works closely with farmer groups to
develop identified geographies for certified

and organic crops. These investments coupled
with deep understanding of agriculture, and
the reach of the ITC e-Choupal network,
provides the opportunity to offer a wide
range of reliable and consistent solutions to
customers that are efficient and effective.

The Road Ahead
In the coming years, we plan to carry out more
life cycle assessment studies of products/
services to evaluate the environmental
impacts at the various life cycle stages, which
would help us in identifying opportunities
for further improving their environmental
attributes. In line with the Board approved
Policies on Life Cycle Sustainability and
Responsible Sourcing, relevant systems
and procedures will be progressively
implemented across ITC Businesses towards
sustainable sourcing of raw materials.
Moreover, for sustainable sourcing of wood
pulp, ITC is planning to bring in more plantation
areas under the FSC – Forest Management
certification in future. This certification
should help bring in better environmental
practices and improved social benefits to the
local communities.

121

ITC has
implemented
several initiatives
to address the
issues of revival
and nurture of
native species of
flora and fauna,
thereby leading
to large-scale
replenishment of
natural resources
and ensuring
a sustainable
future for the
communities
residing in the
Company’s
catchment
areas.

122

Management
Approach
ITC recognises that the preservation and
nurture of biodiversity is essential to ensure
the long-term sustainability of not only
farming communities but the agricultural
sector itself. ITC has accordingly implemented
several initiatives to address the issues
of revival and nurture of native species of
flora and fauna, thereby leading to largescale replenishment of natural resources
and ensuring a sustainable future for the
communities residing in the Company’s
catchment areas.

Biodiversity Risk
and Opportunity
Assessment
One of ITC’s large agri business divisions
has undertaken a detailed risk analysis of its
impacts on biodiversity. It has spearheaded
the implementation of the Biodiversity Risk
and Opportunity Assessment (BROA) process
across its entire operating region. For this
purpose the Business has partnered with
Earth Watch Institute, UK, an international
non-profit organisation specialising in
Biodiversity Risk & Opportunity Study. The
objective is to identify the impacts and
dependencies of crop development on
terrestrial, soil and aquatic biodiversity
in agricultural landscapes; assess and
prioritise the risks and opportunities arising

from those impacts and dependencies;
produce Action and Monitoring Plans for the
business to address them. The agricultural
landscape level approach would encompass
not only farm sites and immediate area of
production, but also the wider features that
agricultural production depends upon. For
this assessment, ITC has engaged with many
internal and external stakeholders including
farmers, local communities, Department
of Agriculture, Forest Department, local
Universities, NGOs and suppliers. The first
stage of the BROA has been completed in
select agricultural landscapes in Mysore
District and is currently underway in other
operating areas of the business. Based on
the findings of this analysis, ITC will put in
place systems and processes to address the
concerns therein.

native tree species, implement soil and water
conservation measures, and adopt livelihood
and employment generation activities
through pisciculture, apiculture and other
related activities. In the past two years, ITC
has developed 9 biodiversity plots involving
farmers and community members covering a
total area of 56.28 acres in Khammam, East
Godavari, West Godavari & Visakhapatnam
districts of Andhra Pradesh. This initiative has
helped in conserving more than a thousand
floral and faunal species. Many species
of birds have started nesting in the area,
which has also become a breeding ground
for reptiles, amphibians and butterflies.
These biodiversity plots have also helped in
improving ground water level and soil fertility
thereby enhancing the livelihood generation
opportunities of local communities.

Social Forestry

Revival of
Commons and
Biodiversity
Conservation Plots

ITC has successfully launched a programme
to conserve and improve biodiversity in its
Social Forestry and Farm Forestry catchment
areas, which would not only revive and
enhance native floral and faunal biodiversity,
but also contribute to livelihood and
employment generation. ITC has spearheaded
this programme to develop biodiversity plots
by motivating local communities to plant

ITC has
developed 9
biodiversity plots
involving famers
and community
members
covering a total
area of 56.28 acres
in Khammam,
East Godavari,
West Godavari &
Visakhapatnam
districts of
Andhra
Pradesh.

The maintenance and nourishment of
common pasturelands assume critical
significance for rural communities. Livestock
is not only a means to a secondary income,

123

resource management in the drought-prone
area, ITC forged a unique public-privatecommunity partnership with the Government
of Rajasthan and the Foundation for
Ecological Security (FES) and launched an
integrated watershed development project in
2007. At the closure of the project in 2010,
ITC had treated 5,171 hectares in five Gram
Panchayats, covering 19 villages.

Greening
Commons
but also a safety net, especially in times
of hardship like drought or floods. In that
respect pasturelands become a common
property of villages. However changes in
land use and the ‘Tragedy of the Commons,’
have put these pasturelands in constant
threat of encroachment and degradation,
thereby adversely affecting the communities
dependent on them.
ITC’s Watershed Development Programme in
Kalyanpura in Rajasthan led to the revival of
biodiversity in the area as well as greening of
arid pastures. To address the issue of natural

ITC’s
Watershed
Development
Programme in
Kalyanpura in
Rajasthan led
to the revival of
biodiversity in the
area as well as
greening of arid
pastures.

124

An important part of the project was to protect
the pastures to regenerate the root stocks
of native species. The project laid special
emphasis on developing the commons and
planted 1,000 hectares with native species
and grass. The saplings were developed from
seeds collected from the surrounding areas
to maintain the nativeness of the species.
Soil and moisture conservation measures,
drainage line treatment and greening
of pastureland led to the flourishing of
biodiversity in the project area. To measure
the impact of the project initiative, ecological
surveys, covering different seasons, were
carried out. According to the surveys, the
vegetation in the project area showed

It was
noted that
plant diversity
and density were
higher outside
the forest areas,
demonstrating
the value of
the project
interventions in
the pastures of
the Kalyanpura
watershed.
considerable improvement. The project
demonstrated that in just three years there
was a marked change in species richness,
density, diversity and regeneration.
It was noted that plant diversity and
density were higher outside the forest
areas, demonstrating the value of the
project interventions in the pastures of the
Kalyanpura watershed. Pastures recorded 54
species (maximum richness), compared to
agriculture land or forests. In the grasslands,
among the 10 tree species recorded,
mature trees comprised three species,
while regeneration was represented by six
species. In contrast, there was no mature
tree in the forestland, while regeneration
was represented by only two of the eight tree
species documented in this land use.
The baseline data for faunal biodiversity was
collected for birds, which showed a doubling
in their species, from 40 to 86, including
migratory birds.
The project demonstrated that a well-

planned watershed development programme
can nurture and revive biodiversity. The
diversity of flora and fauna status is crucial
for any natural and productive ecosystems
as it provides ecological services, which
strengthen watershed development. Though
ecological restoration is a long-term process,
the results of this project show what is
possible in a short span of time if field-specific
approaches are applied and implementation
is done in a rigorous manner.

The Road Ahead
Based on the results of the BROA study
in agricultural landscapes as well as the
outcomes of the implementation of agroforestry and bio-diversity conservation
models, ITC would progressively delineate
a biodiversity strategy by combining
elements related to substantial biodiversity
conservation and improvement, as well as
prevention, management, and remediation of
damage to natural habitats (if any).

125

Social
Performance

Labour
Practices and
Decent Work

Social
Investments Mission
Sunehra Kal

Product
Responsibility

Management
Approach
ITC operates in a diversified, ever-changing,
highly competitive global landscape. This
in turn necessitates the development of a
strong, customer responsive world-class
enterprise premised on a commitment to
employee well-being that goes beyond
conforming with relevant local laws to
complying with global standards.

Employees –
Invaluable Assets
Recent events, both globally and nationally,
have reinforced the critical role that

128

employees and harmonious employee
relations play in enhancing an organisation’s
growth and image. Frequent cases of
industrial violence, which in some cases
are fatal, strikes and lockouts and the
associated turmoil play a major role in
disrupting operations, impacting the market
and damaging the image of companies. In
addition, a demotivated workforce leads to
high turnover, frequent absenteeism, low
productivity and strained employee relations,
which adversely impact the performance of
the company.
At ITC we firmly believe that our people
invigorate the organisation and make it
exceptional, both in driving world class
performance and in nurturing and enhancing
its reputational capital. ITC today has not only
survived and grown for over a century, but has
made substantial progress primarily because

its abiding commitment to employee
engagement that upholds individual dignity
and rewards merit. ITC has consistently
fostered a culture that rewards continuous
learning, collaboration and development
across the organisation to meet the
challenges posed by ever-changing market
realities. ITC’s employment practices are
premised on attracting and retaining talent
based on merit. Its capability building
programmes ensure both vertical as well
as lateral enhancement of skills of all its
employees through customised training
and development inputs. All ITC employees
operate in a work environment that is
benchmarked internationally for the quality
of its safety and health standards.

of a workforce that is highly motivated,
trained, determined and ably supported by a
culture of excellence founded on values that
are imbibed and visibly demonstrated.

Ensuring an
Energetic & SelfMotivated Work
Force
ITC strives to build a culture that nurtures
superior capabilities, high performance
and future-ready human resources through

ITC is equally committed to conducting
business in a manner that reflects its high
ethical standards. It expects its employees and
business partners to subscribe and adhere to
this philosophy which honours all local laws
and upholds the spirit of human rights as
enshrined in existing international standards.
The Board of the Company has approved
policies covering crucial aspects of employee
engagement and human rights.

Implementation
ITC Units have appropriate systems and
processes in place to ensure compliance with
these Policies and with statutory provisions,
including processes to redress grievances.
The implementation of these policies are

ITC has
consistently
fostered
a culture
that rewards
continuous
learning,
collaboration and
development
across the
organisation
to meet the
challenges posed
by ever- changing
market
realities.

129

ITC’s
innovative
talent
management
programme, “Building Winning Businesses.
Building Business Leaders. Creating Value for
India,” strives to deliver its unique promise of
attracting, developing and retaining high-quality
talent. The organisation is guided by a holistic
principle of enquiry, concerned with how the
pattern of multiple elements of talent sourcing,
work design, performance management
and remuneration, individual growth and
development is related to talent management,
rather than how individual elements impact
talent. Leadership development is considered
integral to talent management. ITC’s “strategy
of organisation” serves as an excellent platform
to build distributed business leadership. Another

ITC
is equally
committed
to conducting
business in a
manner that
reflects its
high ethical
standards.
ensured by Divisional / SBU Chief Executives,
through members of the respective
Management Committees. Compliance is
regularly monitored and evaluated by the
Sustainability Compliance Review Committee
(SCRC). The report of the SCRC is reviewed by
the Corporate Management Committee every
quarter.

Outcomes
ITC’s commitment to its employees and their
well-being is reflected in its compliance with
all its stated policies.

Human Resource
Strategy
In order to sustain its position as one of
India’s most valuable corporations, ITC
has relentlessly pursued a strategy of
being
customer-focused,
competitiondifferentiated, performance-driven and
future-capable. The Company’s Human
Resource Development strategy seeks to
fulfill this mandate through careful selection
and rigorous implementation of a wide range
of programmes and interventions.

130

important dimension of building leadership
is the Company’s strategic learning and
development agenda. This agenda is geared to
cater to building front-line managerial capability,
middle-management functional leadership and
organisational stewardship capability of senior
management. This three-pronged strategy of
leadership development has ensured that each
of the Company’s businesses is managed by a
team of competent, passionate and inspiring
leaders, capable of building an organisation
anchored in a culture of learning, innovation,
high performance and value creation.

Engaging Talent
Our Talent Management strategy is focused
on building a high quality ‘future-ready’
pool of managers, specialists and business
leaders. Our talent brand embodies our
commitment to developing managers with
functional expertise, leadership capability
and a desire to contribute to a larger purpose.
The approach is based on:
Attracting and nurturing quality talent
supported by significant investments in
learning and development. This is backed by a
culture of care and concern and is supported
by systems and processes that encourage

proactive engagement and involvement.
Creating a responsive, stakeholder-centric
and market-focused culture that enhances
organisational capability and vitality.
Providing multiple platforms across the
organisation to enable information sharing
and to encourage employees to discuss,
engage and learn from functional experts
and from each other.

Building Business
Leaders
We recruit quality talent from premier
campuses across the country through an
objective and robust selection process. New
employees are assigned to various businesses
of the Company and are deployed across
the country. Our strategy of organisation
is based on the principle of distributed
leadership which has ensured that each
of our businesses is managed by a team of
competent, passionate and inspiring leaders.
Our Company’s talent and capability building
practices have been commended in the
Nielsen 2013 Campustrack survey. According
to the survey, our organisation has emerged
amongst the top five employers of choice
in premier management campuses and
amongst the top three in premier technology
campuses that ITC recruits from.

Our
Talent
Management
strategy is focused
on building a
high quality
‘future-ready’
pool of managers,
specialists and
business
leaders.

131

Supporting
Communities:
Generating
Employment,
Enhancing
Employability
We encourage local employment in our
manufacturing units and hotels, depending
on the availability of requisite skills. In some
of our Units, we also partner with local
Industrial Training Institutes to provide
vital inputs to the management of these
institutions. We have also partnered with
agencies that impart vocational training
on skills related to sales & distribution,
hospitality, construction and technology with
an objective of enhancing the employability of
youth from disadvantaged sections of society.
A large number of youth is also provided
with apprentice training opportunities in our
manufacturing units.
The different value chains related to our
Businesses provide direct and indirect
employment to around 6 million people,
whose livelihoods are substantially linked
to their association with the Company.
Indirect employment covers our supply and
distribution and agri-sourcing network as well
as initiatives under social and farm forestry,

The
different value
chains related
to our Businesses
provide direct
and indirect
employment to
around 6 million
people, whose
livelihoods are
substantially
linked to their
association with
the Company.

132

e-Choupals, women’s empowerment, microenterprises and livestock development.

Employees
Our human resource management systems
and processes aim at creating a responsive,
customer-centric and market focused culture
that enhances organisational capability
and agility.
During 2013-14, our full-time direct
employees numbered 30,442 of which 2,202
employees in the Leaf Tobacco business were
engaged on a seasonal basis due to the very
nature of the business. Of the total number
of employees, 3,088 are women. The number
of new appointees for the reporting period is
4,876 of which 19% are women.
In addition, 19,629 employees of service
providers were engaged during the period.
12,962 of our direct employees are members
of various unions. Employees are involved
in the implementation of best-in-class
technology and process improvements aimed
at enhancing productivity and quality. The
harmonious relations at all operating Units
is a reflection of the Company’s approach
to employee engagement focusing on
a collaborative approach and mutuality
of interests. All changes are proposed,
discussed and finalised during the Long

Gender wise employee break up

Term Agreement negotiations. During the
year there was one strike resulting in a loss of
3,042 person days of work which is equivalent
to 0.02% of the total person days worked.

Employee Numbers
25,000

22,354

20,000

Employee Well
Being

15,000
10,000
5,000

3,947

3,088
929

0
Male

Female

Total Employees

New Hires

ITC believes that its competitive capability
to build future-ready businesses and create
enduring value for stakeholders is enriched by
a dedicated and high-quality human resource
pool. Therefore, nurturing quality talent
and caring for the well-being of employees
are an integral part of ITC’s work culture.

Age wise employee breakup

Employee Numbers
16,000

14,366

14,000
12,000
10,000

11,091

8,000
4,985

6,000
3,893

4,000

943

2,000

40

0
< 30

50 >

30 - 50
Total Employees

Employees
are
involved in the
implementation
of best-in-class
technology
and process
improvements
aimed at
enhancing
productivity and
quality.

New Hires

133

This approach focuses on creating a conducive
work environment that helps deliver winning
performance. Benefits such as medical
assistance (including hospitalisation), group
accident insurance scheme, annual leave
along with leave encashment and retirement
benefits, amongst others, are provided to all
permanent and temporary workers. During the
year under review, 138 employees applied and
were given maternity leave. Of the 138, 95 have
returned to work while 37 are still on leave.

Attrition
ITC has ensured significant attraction and
retention of employees, primarily backed
by its robust talent management strategy of
offering diverse experiences and challenges
across varied business contexts, unparalleled
investments towards development and growth
of employees, as well as a market driven
and competitive remuneration philosophy.
The overall attrition (voluntary separation,
retirement, termination and abandonment
of services) across management and nonmanagement employees for 2013-14 was
14%. The attrition for management level

ITC
has ensured
significant
attraction and
retention of
employees,
primarily backed
by its robust talent
management
strategy

134

employees was 20% whereas the attrition
for non-management workers was 8.6%. The
gender wise attrition was at 12.5% and 28.2%
for male and female employees respectively.

Diversity and Equal
Opportunity
ITC believes that diversity at the workplace
creates an environment conducive to
engagement, alignment, innovation and high
performance. This is achieved by a policy that
ensures diversity and non-discrimination
across the Company.
Our approach to human resource is
premised on the fundamental belief of
fostering meritocracy in the organisation,
which promotes diversity and offers
equal opportunity to all employees. This
ensures that there is no discrimination
in compensation, training and employee
benefits, based on caste, religion, disability,
gender, sexual orientation, race, colour,
ancestry, marital status or affiliation with a
political, religious or union organisation or
majority/minority group.

ITC
has a
multi–pronged
approach
to learning
with focussed
interventions
in core and
functional areas,
customised
business-specific
and strategic
organisation-wide
interventions,
as well as three
tiered leadership
development
programmes.

Learning And
Development
ITC’s Capability Development Agenda flows
from its Vision, Mission, Strategic Agenda
and the 3-Horizon Growth strategy. All
Learning and Development initiatives offered
during 2013-14 were aligned to this agenda.
ITC has a multi–pronged approach to
learning with focussed interventions in
core and functional areas, customised
business-specific and strategic organisationwide interventions, as well as three tiered
leadership development programmes.
There are multiple forums for learning
including classroom training, on-the-job
training, inclusion in taskforces and projects,
mentoring and deploying of organisation wide
portals to enable sharing of best practices.
Employee training at the factory level
focusses on continuous skill upgradation
on the basis of skill-gap assessment and
planned technology induction.
In 2013-14, 1,33,732 person-days of formal
training were organised for employees
at various levels. In addition, on-the-job
learning opportunities were provided to a
cross section of employees supported by
inputs from peers and superiors.

ITC’s Performance Management System
also plays a pivotal role in charting out the
development agenda of employees in the
management cadre. In 2013-14 all eligible
managers underwent performance reviews.
Learning and Development

Person Days

Employee Category
74707

80000
70000
60000

59025

50000
40000
20000
10000
0
Non Management

Management

135

ITC believes that its workforce is a key asset
that contributes to the Company’s standing
as one of India’s most valuable corporations.
The Company believes that a safe and healthy
work environment is a basic requirement for
ensuring employee well-being and that best
practices in occupational health & safety
enhance the Company’s overall performance.
This helps in the attraction and retention of
quality talent and enhances the equity of the
Company as a responsible employer.

Management
Approach
ITC’s approach towards best-in-class
occupational health and safety standards is
articulated in a Board approved EHS Policy

136

that emphasises continuous improvement
and is based on an EHS management system
developed in accordance with internationally
recognised
standards,
supported
by
continued investments towards best-in-class
infrastructure and quality human resources.
As a first step, Environment, occupational
Health & Safety (EHS) requirements are
integrated at the design stage itself for all
new investments in the built environment.
The design reviews cover building & structural
stability, fire & life safety measures, electrical
systems, segregation of man-material
movements, work place lighting, ventilation &
hygiene requirements, noise & dust controls,
water and energy use optimisation, etc. The
process of incorporating EHS at the design
stage not only helps in eliminating/reducing
hazards but also optimises the overall
infrastructure as well as operational costs.

As a next step, compliance with EHS
standards during the construction phase is
ensured by implementing appropriate Project
EHS management systems. This includes
adequate training of all employees including
service providers’ employees, enforcement
of use of safe equipment/tools/tackles,
personal protective equipment, development
of and adherence to safe work procedures/
method statements and observance of good
housekeeping and storage practices. Precommissioning audits of all large projects
are carried out by Corporate EHS (CEHS)
to ensure that all equipment and systems
have been procured and installed in
conformance with agreed standards and a
formal clearance provided before making the
project operational.
At the operational stage, all our factories,
hotels, warehouses and offices have
established Environment, Health & Safety
(EHS) Management systems. These include
designated roles and responsibilities
and competent EHS resources to ensure
compliance with defined internal EHS

Guidelines. As per these guidelines, every
Unit is required to have EHS committees to
promote active participation of employees
and service providers in EHS management.
The committees have equal representation
from workers and management. These
Guidelines also require raising of awareness
amongst employees, their families and
surrounding communities on off-the-job
safety aspects such as home safety, safe use
of LPG in the kitchen, HIV/AIDS, hepatitis,
dengue, malaria and road safety. As part of
our preventive medical programme, various
categories of employees, based on their
age and exposure to occupational hazards,
undergo periodic medical check-ups.
Compliance is verified through internal
audits conducted by the CEHS across ITC
establishments, on a periodic basis and forms
part of the report back to CMC (monthly) and
the Board (quarterly), together with accident
statistics, their investigation and subsequent
closure.

Environment,
Occupational
Health & Safety
requirements
are integrated at
the design stage
itself for all new
investments
in the built
environment.

The EHS resources of the Divisions provide
necessary support to ensure proper

137

Detailed
investigation
and analysis
of accidents
helped us better
understand the
challenges being
faced, particularly
by our Business
Units.

implementation of the ITC EHS policy, while
Unit Heads and Divisional Management
Committees are responsible and accountable
for ensuring compliance. The Corporate EHS
function is responsible for reviewing and
updating standards and guidelines on EHS
policies, providing guidance and support to
all concerned and for monitoring compliance
at the corporate level.

On-Site Safety
Performance
ITC EMPLOYEES
In 2013-14, the number of on-site Lost
Time Accidents (LTA) for ITC employees was

10 (against 16 in 2012-13), as illustrated
below. Since 2004-05, although the number
of Units have increased manifold from 23
in 2004-05 to 47 in 2013-14, the Lost Time
Accidents (defined as an accident where
the injured person does not return to work
in the next scheduled shift) have come
down by 73% due to significant efforts
made by all Units towards our zero accident
goal. Detailed investigation and analysis of
accidents helped us better understand the
challenges being faced by our Business Units.
Besides the strong engineering approach,
behaviour-based safety programmes are
being institutionalised and behavioural
architecture inputs are being used to
rework and recalibrate our approach, which
are detailed in the subsequent section ‘The Road Ahead’.

Lost Time Accidents (LTA)

37

16

14

20

23
15

12

73%
Reduction in Lost
Time Accidents

07

10

2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
LTA - An accident where the injured does not return to work in the next scheduled shift

138

16

Lost Day Rate - ITC Employees

6.5
2.2

3.5

28.4*

25.3*

3.1

2.2

1.9

1.1

2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
* Increase in lost day rate in 2009-10 & 2011-12 was due to one fatal accident in each of the years, wherein loss of
6,000 man days of work was considered, as per IS 3786 - 1983: “Method for computation of frequency and severity
rates for industrial injuries and classification of industrial accidents.”

Lost day rate, defined as the number of days
lost due to accidents for every 2,00,000
person hours worked, over the years is
depicted above. The lost day rate reflects
a downward trend since 2005-06, barring
2009-10 and 2011-12, owing to one fatal
accident in each of these periods.

safe work procedures. Regular briefing and
tool box talk have been made an integral
part of ITC’s safety management system, for
continuously updating all service providers’
employees on safe work procedures.
Since last year, we have also started reporting
on the safety performance of our service

Injury Rate (IR)

0.21
0.09

20042005

20052006

0.08

20062007

0.09

0.09
0.06

20072008

20082009

Injury rate, defined as the frequency of
injuries in relation to total time worked,
over the last 10 years showed a significant
improvement. Since 2004-05, there has been
a reduction of injury rate from 0.21 to 0.03 in
2013-14 (an improvement of 86%).

Employees of
Service Providers
All vendors and service providers within ITC
premises are required to follow the same
systems and procedures detailed under
ITC’s Corporate EHS Guidelines. All service
providers’ employees also undergo adequate
standard as well as job-specific training for

0.05

20092010

20102011

0.06
0.02

20112012

20122013

0.03

20132014

providers’ employees within ITC premises.
Though total onsite lost time accidents for
service providers’ employees for the year
was 15 (as against 16 in 2012-13), this is
inclusive of 3 very unfortunate on-site
fatalities of service providers’ employees, out
of which two had been in ITC’s Paperboards
and Specialty Papers Bhadrachalam Unit and
one in ITC Gardenia, our hotel at Bengaluru.

All
vendors
and service
providers within
ITC premises are
required to follow
the same systems
and procedures
detailed under
ITC’s Corporate
EHS Guidelines.

Fatal Accidents: Details of the three fatalities
that took place within ITC units during 201314 are as follows:
One of the employees of a service provider
in ITC’s Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Unit at Bhadrachalam fell from a height
of 3.9 metres while removing waste paper
from a working platform and passed

139

away subsequently due to internal brain
haemorrhage. In the second case at the same
Unit, a truck cleaner while resting in the coal
yard area, was run over by a pay-loader and
sustained fatal injuries on his head. The third
fatal accident was in ITC Gardenia, wherein
an employee of a service provider engaged
for housekeeping activities, while cleaning a
chandelier, lost balance and fell along with
the chandelier, resulting in fatal injuries on
his head and neck.

Leaf Threshing Unit at Anaparti

All the fatal accidents have been investigated
in depth and appropriate interventions
have been implemented in the Businesses.
These interventions include improving
risk management practices, strengthening
the
behavioural
safety
initiatives,
commissioning specific studies such as a
traffic safety management study for ITC’s
Unit at Bhadrachalam to rationalise traffic
management within the premises, as well
as initiation of disciplinary action against
supervisory staff, as applicable.

Research Centre at Rajahmundry

Zero Accident
Units
The following Units at ITC attained the goal of
‘zero accidents’ in 2013-14:
Cigarette Units at Saharanpur, Kolkata &
Pune

140

Packaging & Printing Units at Haridwar &
Munger
Paperboards and Specialty Papers Unit at
Bollaram
Personal Care Products Unit at Manpura
Life Sciences and Technology Centre,
Bengaluru

ITC Green Centre, Gurgaon
ITC Infotech Units at Bengaluru and Kolkata
Trade Marketing and Distribution
ITC Head Quarters, Kolkata
Divisional Head Quarters of Cigarettes
Business, Agri Business, Leaf Tobacco
Business, Paperboards & Specialty Papers
Business, Packaging & Printing Business,
Foods Business, Personal Care Products
Business, Matches & Agarbattis, Education
and Stationery Products Business and
Lifestyle Retailing Business.
Hotels: ITC Maurya, ITC Mughal, ITC Grand
Central, ITC Rajputana, ITC Maratha, ITC Sonar,
ITC Windsor, ITC Grand Chola, My Fortune,
Chennai & WelcomHotel Sheraton New Delhi

Over the years, the number of Units
delivering “zero on-site lost time accidents”
performance has progressively increased
and more importantly, have held on to their
performance. Out of the above 35 units, 16
Units have been consistently achieving “zero
lost time accidents” status for the last 3 years.

Off-Site Safety
Performance
In line with our goal to achieve “zero accidents”
across our operations, we have started putting
in place adequate systems to ensure the safety
of our own employees working off-site. In ITC,
off-site is defined as places other than on-site
while on official duty, including commuting
to and from residence to the place of work.
In order to identify suitable management

interventions, detailed investigation of all offsite accidents over the years has been carried
out. These analyses reveal that the majority
of off-site accidents have involved 2-wheeler
riders. Accordingly, a user-interactive
2-wheeler rider’s safety programme was
developed and rolled out in 2011-12.
Businesses were advised to ensure that all
employees using 2-wheelers are trained and
that there is a constant reinforcement of the
message of exercising extreme care while
on the road. Despite this, there has been an
increase in the number of road accidents as
compared to the previous year, out of which
85% involved employees riding 2-wheelers,
which included one very unfortunate off-site
fatal accident in which an ITC Executive on
a 2-wheeler died in a road accident while on
official duty. Though road infrastructure and
traffic management outside our premises
are well beyond our control, we are providing
a special thrust on training and awareness
building by translating the interactive ITC
2-wheeler rider’s safety programme into local
languages to ensure 100% coverage of all
employees.

16
Units have been
achieving zero lost
time accidents for
the last three years

Occupational
Health
A healthy workforce is an important contributor
to our competitiveness and sustainability. All
Units maintain conducive work environments
meeting Indian/International standards on
hygiene, lighting, ventilation and effective
controls on noise and dust.
Units are provided with occupational
health centres with adequate medical
staff to monitor occupational health and

Road Accidents Trend

25
20

17
10

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

141

provide immediate relief when required. In
addition, at least 2% of our employees are
professionally trained as first aiders.

The
focus now
is on fostering
a culture of
safety and use
of behavioural
architecture
techniques.

Identified medical examinations are
conducted for various categories of
employees based on age-groups as well as
exposure to occupational hazards. These
medical examinations take place annually/
once in 3/5 years as applicable.
Accordingly in 2013-14, 14,874 employees
underwent preventive medical examinations
and there were no occupation related illnesses
identified in any of our business Units.

HIV/AIDS and
other Serious
Diseases
We have remained committed to do our best
in response to the threat posed by various
serious diseases including HIV/AIDS. During
2013-14, awareness/ counselling sessions
were conducted for the employees and
communities around our Units covering a total
of 16,665 people, out of which 11,330 were
our employees while the remaining were local
community members.

The Road Ahead
Based on the root-cause analysis of accidents
over the years, the approach to safety has
been redefined. The focus now is on fostering
a culture of safety and use of behavioural

All Units
maintain
conducive work
environments
meeting Indian/
International
standards on
hygiene, lighting,
ventilation and
effective controls
on noise and
dust.

142

architecture techniques. This is being
enabled by the creation of an organisationwide culture of safety, involving individual
ownership and integration with business
processes, which also support a “One Unit-One
team” approach. Such a shared ownership not
only ensures accountability but also provides
the opportunity for optimisation in safety
hardware costs. Our safety management
system is being evolved to ensure that
training and other communications are
relevant and that they factor in the local
socio-economic context thus confirming the
transition from “awareness developed” to
“changed behaviour”.
While we continue to focus on strengthening
engineering control measures through ‘design
for safety’, pre-commissioning/ operational
audits and training interventions, behaviourbased safety programmes, initiated in two
of ITC’s Units, will also be extended to
other Units in the coming years. It is also of
paramount importance that safety as a value
system is inculcated among new recruits
in the organisation through meaningful
and impactful communication. A corporate
safety induction training programme based
on this concept has been developed using
cognitive neuroscience and behavioural
economics inputs. Based on the success of
this programme, more such interventions
will be planned at Unit/Divisional levels. This
approach, which combines empowerment
and ownership with targeted interventions
and stringent accountability, should help us
in our journey towards achieving the “Zero
Accidents” goal.

During 2013-14, nearly `1,632 crores out
of total capex cash flow of `2,661 crores
was incurred on machinery and technology,
sourced from reputed global suppliers/vendors.
Approximately ` 692 crores were invested on
new factories, hotels and modernisations.
All large contracts in ITC, for the construction
of hotels, factories, and significant upgrades,
have incorporated environment, health,
safety and human rights clauses covering
decent place of work, and beyond compliance
labour practices.
All large projects were managed and supervised
by ITC managers, who also ensured compliance
to relevent laws.
Systems have been established to ensure
compliance of our Policies and Standards,
through rigorous audits by Corporate Internal
Audit and Corporate EHS.

Human Rights:
Supply Chain
As a large multi-business Enterprise with
products that are benchmarked nationally
and internationally, we recognise our
responsibility to proactively encourage high
standards of ‘Human Rights’ across our
Supply Chain. Our approach to managing
Human Rights in the following distinct
categories is described below:
Our Businesses are vertically integrated
across several Divisions, all of which ensure
adherence to ITC Human Rights policies.
We procure inputs for the Company’s
agri-based businesses entirely from state
controlled trading platforms and the open
market. The Process is designed to ensure

All large
contracts
in ITC, for the
construction of
hotels, factories,
and significant
upgrades, have
incorporated
environment,
health, safety and
human rights’
clauses covering
decent place of
work, and beyond
compliance
labour
practices.

143

transparency and best prices for even small
and marginal farmers.

As
a large
multi-business
Enterprise with
products that are
benchmarked
nationally and
internationally,
we recognise
our responsibility
to proactively
encourage high
standards of
‘Human Rights’
across our
Supply Chain.

ITC ensures the adherence to its Policy on
Human Rights, Labour Practices and decent
Work Environment for all its employees and
for all Service Providers operating within its
Establishments. ITC has zero tolerance for
non-compliance in this area.
During 2013-14, the total number of Service
Providers was 2,574 of which 1,646 operated
within the Company’s premises and 928
worked off-site. All on-site contracts include
important clauses on Environment, Health
and Safety.
No contracts were cancelled during the year
as a result of non-compliance with ITC’s
Human Rights Policy.

Freedom of
Association
During 2013-14, no incidents of violation of
Freedom of Association were reported either
to the concerned units or statutory authorities.
Within ITC’s operations, there are no areas

with risks to the right to exercise Freedom of
Association and Collective Bargaining.

Prohibiting
Child Labour
and Preventing
Forced Labour at
Workplace
During 2013-14, there were no incidents
of child labour or forced labour within ITC
establishments. In the subsequent year, we will
initiate the process of strengthening Systems
to educate, mandate and thereafter track
adherence to ITC’s Policy on Human Rights in
the Supply Chain. This Process should be well
established over the next five years.

Diversity and Equal
Opportunity
In line with the Company’s Policy on Diversity
and Equal Opportunity (Please refer to Policies
on ITC’s Corporate website - www.itcportal.
com).andgiventhesocio-culturaldiversityofour
country, ITC’s recruitment and selection
processes are geared towards enabling
representation
from
across
regions,
ethnicities, religions and different social
strata.
The culture of the Company ensures that
aspects of work-life balance for employees,
especially for women, are suitably addressed.
The Company has put in place suitable
processes and mechanisms to ensure
issues such as sexual harassment, if any,
are effectively addressed. During the year,
three complaints of sexual harassment
were received, of which two have since been
resolved. ITC demands, demonstrates and
promotes professional behaviour and treats
all employees with equal respect.

144

ITC believes that it is necessary to represent
to and engage with authorities on matters
concerning the various sectors in which
it operates. The Board approved Policy
on Responsible Advocacy provides the
framework for the necessary interface with
Government/Regulatory Authorities. ITC
works with apex industry institutions that
are engaged in policy advocacy, like the
Confederation of Indian Industry, Federation
of Indian Chambers of Commerce and
Industry, Associated Chambers of Commerce
and Industry of India and various other
forums including regional Chambers of
Commerce. ITC’s engagement with the
relevant authorities is guided by the values
of commitment, integrity, transparency
and the need to balance interests of
diverse stakeholders.

The Company, for its social development
projects, organises meetings with the local
administration and state governments to seek
their participation and involvement. Their
expert advice and counsel are also sought
and approvals obtained, where required, for
the planned interventions. The Company also
engages in public-private-partnerships (PPP)
with the state governments for such projects.
The CII-ITC Centre of Excellence for
Sustainable Development also interacts
with the Government and policy makers
to promote sustainable development and
inclusive growth through corporate action.

ITC’s
engagement
with the relevant
authorities
is guided by
the values of
commitment,
integrity,
transparency
and the need to
balance interests
of diverse
stakeholders.

145

Strengthening
rural livelihoods
through:
ITC e-Choupal
Wasteland
Development through
Social Forestry
Soil & Moisture
Conservation
Programmes
Livestock
Development
Initiatives

Building skills
and social
infrastructure
through:
Primary Education,
Health & Sanitation
Women’s
Empowerment &
Gender Equality

146

Management
Approach
ITC believes that the performance of business
enterprises must be measured in terms of the
value they create for society. Enterprises that
embed sustainability into their strategies
can create substantial stakeholder value
through innovative development models
that simultaneously generate sustainable
livelihood opportunities as well as create
a positive environmental footprint. The
Company firmly believes that such an
approach unleashes strong drivers for
achieving development with social equity.

Commitment to
creating larger
societal value
As part of its Triple Bottom Line commitment,
ITC is committed to make growth more
inclusive by focusing on the needs of two
identified stakeholders:
The rural communities engaged in
agriculture, from whom ITC procures a
substantial share of raw materials. Almost
all these crops are grown under rain-fed
conditions in some of the most moisture
stressed regions of the country. Given
the critical reliance of several of our
businesses on agri-supply chains, it is in the
Company’s interest to enable rural farmers
to strengthen their production system and
enhance yields on a sustainable basis.

The communities residing in close proximity
of ITC’s production units, so as to enable
them improve their standard of living. ITC’s
inclusive models enable these neighbouring
communities to live a life of social and
economic
dignity,
thus
responding
meaningfully to their needs and aspirations.

Constructive
Stakeholder
Engagement
The overarching aim of the Company’s
social sector engagement is to empower
stakeholder communities to conserve,
augment and manage their social and
environmental capital in order to promote
sustainable livelihoods or employability on a
significant scale. Within this, the two specific
objectives, pertaining to the two sets of
stakeholders, are:
Promotion
of
climate-smart
rural
development by broad-basing the farm
and off-farm livelihoods portfolio of the
poor and marginalised. Such interventions
strengthen the existing productive base
as well as provide alternate sources
of incomes, which helps minimise the
dependence of farmers on rain-fed crops
for economic survival.

Implementation
The Board CSR Committee tables for the
Board’s approval, a CSR Plan outlining the
CSR Programmes to be carried out during
the financial year and the specified budgets
therein. The Board deliberates and approves
the CSR Plan with modifications that may be
deemed necessary. The Company’s Corporate
Management Committee (CMC) reviews the
implementation of the CSR Programmes and
issues necessary directions from time to time
to ensure orderly and efficient execution
of CSR Programmes in accordance with
this Policy. In addition, the CMC provides a
status update to the CSR and Sustainability
Committee on the progress in implementation
of the approved CSR Programmes. The CSR
and Sustainability Committee reviews such
reports and keeps the Board apprised of the
implementation status of the same.

Outcomes
Innovative interventions have been designed
and implemented that:

The
overarching
aim of the
Company’s
social sector
engagement
is to empower
stakeholder
communities
to conserve,
augment and
manage their
social and
environmental
capital in order
to promote
sustainable
livelihoods or
employability on
a significant
scale.

Create sustainable livelihoods for some of the
most disadvantaged sections of the society.

Nurture and develop social capital to
create a more level playing field for skillrelated modern production and to meet
the competitive demands for higher
productivity. Both, in turn, generate higher
incomes and help in alleviating poverty.
Striding a wider canvas in the interest of
the nation, ITC is committed to pursuing
excellence in sustainability and preserving
India’s unique cultural heritage.
The Board has approved a CSR Policy
that covers the programmes, projects
and activities that the Company plans to
undertake. These programmes fall within
the purview of Schedule VII of the provisions
of Section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013
and the Companies (Corporate Social
Responsibility Policy) Rules, 2014.

147

Nurture the environment by promoting
sustainability practices through industry
associations.
Preserve and promote Indian heritage and
culture.
Recognising that business enterprises are
economic organs of society and draw on
societal resources, it is ITC’s belief that a
company’s performance must be measured by
its Triple Bottom Line contribution to building
economic, social and environmental capital
towards enhancing societal sustainability.
ITC believes that in the strategic context of
business, enterprises possess, beyond mere
financial resources, the transformational
capacity
to
create
game-changing
development models by unleashing their
power of entrepreneurial vitality, innovation
and creativity. In line with this belief, ITC

continues to craft unique models to generate
livelihoods and environmental capital. Such
Corporate Social Responsibility (“CSR”)
projects are far more replicable, scalable
and sustainable, with a significant multiplier
impact on sustainable livelihood creation
and environmental replenishment.
In line with ITC’s CSR Policy, the key
stakeholders and the thrust areas of its CSR
programmes comprise:
The rural communities with whom ITC’s
agri-businesses have forged long and
enduring partnerships through their crop
development and procurement activities.
The majority of these communities are
located in drought-prone regions and
therefore most vulnerable to the adverse
impacts of seasonality and environmental
degradation. Almost entirely dependent

ITC’s Responses to Stakeholder Needs

ITC
believes
that in the
strategic context
of business,
enterprises
possess, beyond
mere financial
resources, the
transformational
capacity to create
game-changing
development
models by
unleashing
their power of
entrepreneurial
vitality,
innovation and
creativity.

148

Key
Stakeholders
Rural households
aligned to ITC’s
agri-businesses

Objectives
Biomass cover of
33% of project areas
Progress towards
‘safe groundwater
zone’ status

Strategic
Interventions

Desired
Outcomes

Natural Resource
Management,
Integrated Animal
Husbandry, Sustainable
Agriculture

Sustainable
& accelerated
growth in
livelihoods and
farm incomes

Sustainable Livelihoods
Creation, Social
Infrastructure, Skilling

Dignity of
life through
economic
& social
empowerment

Initiatives promoting
national goals of
poverty alleviation
and environmental
protection

Multistakeholder
partnership
to maximise
development
impact

Achieve 0.75-1%
soil organic carbon
50% of village GDP
from dairy activities
Communities
residing around
ITC’s factories

Poor women to have
access to credit
or supplementary
income
Every child in school
and learning well
Appropriate skills for
all unemployed youth
No open defecation

State & Central
Governments

Innovate and pilot
development models
of excellence for
replication, scale and
efficient execution

on common property resources, they are
among the most disadvantaged sections of
rural communities.
The communities residing in close proximity
of our production units, whose full potential
cannot be realised due to poor social
infrastructure in the areas of education,
skill enhancement, health and sanitation.
The Central Government and State
Governments, with which we partner to roll
out and scale up innovative projects piloted
to create replicable models of development.

ITC e-Choupal
Recognising the various challenges faced by
the farmer, the ITC e-Choupal was designed to
provide a 360-degree intervention to trigger
a virtuous cycle of higher farm productivity,
higher income, enlarged capacity for farmer risk
management, and thereby larger investments
to enable higher quality and productivity.
The first level of the e-Choupal system
consists of a network of village internet

kiosks that enables even small and marginal
farmers in rural India who are delinked
from the formal market to access real time
information on weather, market prices,
relevant knowledge and quality inputs
to enhance farm productivity and quality
and command better prices, thus making
them more competitive in the national and
global markets. The kiosks are managed by
farmers themselves and one selected farmer
called the sanchalak is trained to help his
community access ready information in
their local language. At the next level of the
e-Choupal system are the Choupal Saagars,
which are procurement-cum-retail hubs
located within tractorable distance of 25-30
kms. The e-Choupal network also provides
customised extension services, knowhow
on best farming practices, quality agriinputs like seeds, herbicides, fertilisers and
pesticides through a single channel.
By providing knowhow and connecting
farmers to markets, the e-Choupal network
has enabled a virtual integration of the
supply chain and eliminated wasteful
intermediation and multiple handling, which
led to significant reduction in transaction

40,000
villages benefitted
from the e-Choupal
initiative

ITC
e-Choupal
was designed
to provide a
360-degree
intervention to
trigger a virtuous
cycle of higher
farm productivity,
higher income,
enlarged capacity
for farmer risk
management, and
thereby larger
investments to
enable higher
quality and
productivity.

149

The
e-Choupal
is an important
component
of ITC’s multidimensional
Integrated Rural
Development
Programme that
had evolved
from its deep
understanding
of the challenges
and opportunities
inherent in the
farm sector.

costs apart from expanding markets and
enhancing rural incomes.
The e-Choupal initiative today covers 40,000
villages benefitting 4 million farmers. As a
result of these interventions, ITC e-Choupal
initiative has enabled farmers to raise
productivity levels and incomes through
capacity building, technology transfer
including knowhow, building market
linkages and value chain integration. There
is visible development in the e-Choupal
villages with rising purchasing power,
as well as infrastructure development
arising out of increased economic activity.
Efficient market signals have also led to
crop quality improvement, aligning it with
consumer preferences.
The e-Choupal is an important component
of ITC’s multi-dimensional Integrated
Rural Development Programme that had
evolved from its deep understanding of
the challenges and opportunities inherent
in the farm sector. The strategy of this
intervention which is aimed at empowering
farmers and raising rural incomes is broadly
centred around four distinct dimensions,
which together enable a comprehensive
development of the rural ecosystem.
These dimensions are in the areas of (a)
information and knowledge dissemination.
(b) Access to quality inputs and markets. (c)
Generating supplementary incomes and (d)
Natural resource augmentation. Farmers

150

are provided with critical information and
relevant knowledge on farm productivity,
prices and markets through the ITC
e-Choupal. This platform also enables access
to quality inputs for better productivity
besides expanding the reach to markets.
Initiatives such as Livestock Development
and Women Empowerment create avenues
for supplementary non-farm incomes to
protect against agri-income volatility as
well as build capacities for investment.
Watershed Development as well as
Afforestation Programmes augment natural
resources to enable higher productivity,
create a green cover and restore soil health.
Taken together, the ITC-Choupal programmes
have had a transformational impact in many
areas of rural India.

ITC’S SOCIAL
INVESTMENT
PROGRAMMES
ITC has put in place a mutually reinforcing CSR
Programme _ christened Mission Sunehra
Kal (MSK) _ which has been designed to
liberate even the most underprivileged and
marginalised among these stakeholder
groups, from the shackles of poverty and
underdevelopment
through
economic

empowerment based on grassroots capacity
building. ITC is ideally positioned to respond
to these challenges, given its core objective
of empowering its stakeholder communities
to promote sustainable livelihoods, which,
in turn, is strategically aligned to the
national goals of poverty eradication and
environmental regeneration.

ITC
is ideally
positioned to
respond to the
challenges of poverty and underdevelopment, given
its core objective
of empowering its
stakeholder
communities to
promote
sustainable
livelihoods, which,
in turn, is
strategically
aligned to the
national goals of
poverty
eradication and
environmental
regeneration.

Rural Households
– Climate Smart
Agriculture
Already
water-stressed
and
facing
widespread environmental degradation,
approximately two-third of the country’s

population is rural and dependent on
agriculture and allied activities for their
livelihoods. The overwhelming majority are
small/marginal farmers whose only option
is rain-fed agriculture. With a direct and
symbiotic dependence on climate sensitive
sectors, they naturally have low adaptive
capacities. Stagnating productivity is
exacerbated by the fragile natural resource
base, fragmented land-holdings, unscientific
land management practices, overuse of
chemical fertilisers, falling incomes and,
increasingly, by the growing effects of
climate change. Dwindling bio-mass has
created pressure on fodder and energy needs
for these households. Livelihood security

is further constrained by limited off-farm
employment options, poor infrastructure
and inadequate marketing channels. These
factors all combine to perpetuate a cycle of
endemic poverty.
Given the geographical diversity of its
stakeholder communities, ITC’s main
challenge is to develop models that could be
replicated across locations with the flexibility
to be tailored to individual community
needs. These twin concerns are addressed
by a faithful adherence to four fundamental
tenets:
Enhance the ecological resource base
of the rural economy by strengthening

151

Animal Husbandry
and Dairy
Development

community-based governance of natural
resources that protects, preserves, nurtures
and expands such resources;
Employ a bottom-up participatory approach
that ensures an in-built flexibility to
address diverse needs _ aiming to create
empowered village institutions and enable
communities to co-operatively conserve
and manage their resources;

ITC
provides
doorstep
artificial
insemination
(AI) services to
produce crossbred progeny
with yields that
are significantly
higher, converting
a low-yielding
asset into a
profitable new
livelihood
opportunity.

152

Encourage collaborative processes and
multi-stakeholder partnerships to enable
identification of the best strategies to
address community needs and expand the
development footprint of each project;
Put in place end-to-end solutions that
address the spectrum of needs of these
communities instead of focusing solely on
a single issue.

COVERAGE
The projects promoted under the CSR
programme increased from 107 in 2012-13
to 110 during the reporting period. These
projects are spread across 13 states covering
61 districts. The interventions reach out to
more than 6.40 lakh households in more than
9,100 villages. Of the total projects currently
being implemented, 83% are designed for
rural stakeholder households, while the
balance 17% addresses stakeholders residing
around our factories. The CSR programme is
spread across the states of Andhra Pradesh,
Assam, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha,
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand, Uttar
Pradesh and West Bengal.

ITC’s Livestock Development programme
promotes animal husbandry as a viable
livelihood option by leveraging the fact
that the majority of rural households own
cattle. It is estimated that animal husbandry
contributes 30-50% of rural household
incomes, but livestock quality is poor and milk
yields abysmal. ITC provides doorstep artificial
insemination (AI) services to produce crossbred progeny with yields that are significantly
higher, converting a low-yielding asset into
a profitable new livelihood opportunity. A
comprehensive package of services, covering
AI and all aspects of cattle health, is provided
through Cattle Development Centres (CDCs)
which are manned by local youth trained as
technicians.
Commencing in 2003-04, there are currently
261 CDCs, spread across 7 states. 3.98 lakh
cross-bred progeny have been born to date
and animal husbandry services were provided
to over 10 lakh breedable cattle.
The Company’s CSR initiatives aimed at
enhancing milk production, increasing dairy
farm productivity and ensuring remunerative
prices to farmers in multiple locations
continued to make good progress during

Activity

2012-13

2013-14

Cum to 2013-14

CDC Centres (No)

10

(42)

261

No of AIs (Lakhs)

2.75

2.55

13.37

No of Pregnancies (Lakhs)

1.30

1.40

6.24

No of Calfing (Lakhs)

0.89

0.91

3.98

Vaccination & Health (Lakhs)

0.72

0.14

5.03

Breed Improvement

Average Daily Procurement,
2013-14 (kgs/day)

Apr-Jun Jul-Sep Oct-Dec
Series 1 10, 280 9, 350 10, 246

194
Milk Producer
Groups have come
up in Munger

Average Number of Farmers
per day

Jan-Mar

25, 428

the year. A unique cashless milk payment
system which enables direct electronic
payment into farmers’ bank accounts,
together with a comprehensive package of
extension services such as veterinary care,
breeding, supply of balanced cattle feed and
feed supplements, fodder propagation and
training of dairy farmers has been initiated.
In Munger (Bihar), the milk procurement
network has increased to 194 Milk Producer
Groups (MPGs) with over 4,500 members.
The average daily procurement in Munger
was 13,729 lpd with a peak of 35,441 lpd.
Extension services were also promoted in
28 villages in Nanauta and Gangoh blocks
of Saharanpur (UP). Baseline surveys

Series 1

Apr-Jun

Jul-Sep Oct-Dec

1, 711

1, 666

1, 691

Jan-Mar

3,607

to determine the status of the livestock
economy in Pune district (Maharashtra) was
completed during the year.

Social Forestry
PROGRAMME DESIGN
The Social Forestry programme is specifically
targeted towards small-holders (in particular
Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes).
Marginalised, both economically and socially
with landholdings generally less than 1
hectare, they are not considered credit worthy

The
Company’s
CSR initiatives
aimed at
enhancing milk
production,
increasing dairy
farm productivity
and ensuring
remunerative
prices to farmers
in multiple
locations
continued to
make good
progress during
the year.

153

by formal lenders and are compelled to work
as daily wage earners or indebted labour.
They are often forced to resort to seasonal
out-migration to earn their livelihood. These
households are mobilised to form Wood
Producers Associations (WPAs) through
which ITC provides long-term interest-free
loans and a package of extension services
– silvicultural training, land development,
financial management, plantation and
documentation maintenance.
Members are mandated to repay their loans
(single payment or in instalments) to the
association after the first harvest to build
a corpus for the Village Development Fund
(VDF), which is used to extend loans for
further plantations, for emergencies and
to invest in community assets. During the
gestation period, lops and tops help to
meet household fuel requirements while

intercropping is encouraged to provide a
source of income and nutrition.

PERFORMANCE
Commencing in 2001-02, the programme
has cummulatively greened nearly 45,000
hectares in Andhra Pradesh and 2,600 hectares
in Karnataka. Plantation activities like land
development, planting, felling, debarking,
etc. generate employment, especially for the
landless. To date, both the Farm and Social
Forestry programmes have generated over 73
million person-days of employment. A total of
1,058 village WPAs have a collective VDF of
` 1.14 crores.
The highlights of this year included: (a) the
incorporation of bio-diversity conservation
as an integral part of the Social Forestry
programme, which aims for in-situ conservation

Activity

2012-13 2013-14

Harvest
Area (Hectares)

756

1,623

Farmers (No)

813

2,321

Volume
Harvested
(Tonnes)

28,137

60,519

Total
Income
(` Lakh)

773

2,949

Repayment
to Committee/
NGO

6

20

Earnings/
Household

95,067

127,067

Earnings/
Hectare

102,247

181,724

47,182
Hectares of
plantation area
under Social
Forestry in Andhra
Pradesh and
Karnataka

To
date, both
the Farm and
Social Forestry
programmes
have generated
over 73 million
person-days of
employment.

154

Activity

2012-13

2013-14

Cum to 2013-14

No of new villages

396

719

2,436

No of new beneficiaries

10,102

12,827

52,670

Andhra Pradesh (Hectares)

8,554

12,649

44,605

Karnataka (Hectares)

700

1,083

2,577

Saplings Planted (Lakhs)

821

888

2,936

Agro-forestry Area (Hectares)

492

3,848

4,670

Coverage

Plantation Area

of the local flora by protecting and improving
production conditions in the selected plots; and
(b) Expansion in the coverage of agro-forestry,
aimed at food and wood security; 3,848
hectares were brought under agro-forestry, an
eight-fold increase compared to the previous
year. The most common intercrops grown
comprised cotton, pulses, vegetables and chilli.
The total area harvested by the end of
the year (1,623 hectares) was more than
double that of the previous year as was the
total harvest (61,000 tonnes) generating a
total wealth of nearly ` 30 crores for poor
and marginal farmers. This resulted in an
appreciable increase in the earnings per
hectare and per household, sufficient to pull
poor households out of a low income/debt
trap. Plantation incomes represent earnings
from a previously unproductive asset, which
has gained value as the tangible economic
benefits of the programme have escalated
land prices and lease rates.

IMPACT
An impact assessment survey was conducted
in November–December 2012 by iKOnet
Research & Consultants covering 1,648
beneficiaries in 62 sample villages in the
Khammam District. Some of the significant
findings of the study are as follows:
Change in Land-use pattern: The Social
Forestry (SF) Plantations were found to
cover large tracts of uplands and fallow
lands which are generally under no
productive use.
The plantations thus
emerged as a superior land-use option
against other agricultural crops for such
lands. As a result, SF plantations have
emerged as the second most important crop
in the region after foodgrains.

Land Use by Major Crops (% of total)

Foodgrains
Series 1

36%

Social Forestry Cash Crop

33%

31%

Share of Total Income by Source: The
study found that earnings from SF were a
significant addition to the total income of
the beneficiaries, amounting to Rs 7,000/annually, which was found to be 11% of
the total annual income of the households.
More importantly, the increase in income
from various sources post introduction
of the project was the highest for SF
plantations. It accounted for nearly half of
the increase in total household incomes,
significantly higher than even agricultural
crops.
Share of Increased Income by Source (%)

3,848
hectares were
brought under
Agro-Forestry, an
eight-fold increase
compared to the
previous year

49%
33%
13%

Social
Forestry

Agri
Crop

5%

Farm
Lab

Other
Incomes

Asset ownership changes:
The most
noticeable impact has been on asset creation
as a result of the lump sum earnings every
4 years from the plantations. More than
half the households have invested in better
and safer housing (pucca homes or cement
floors). Expenditure on household durables
Asset Ownership Changes (% of Sample Households)

2012-13
2006-07

Pucca
House

Cement
Floor

TV

2
Wheelers

LPG
Gas

BoreWells

Livestock

55%
13%

51%
13%

68%
22%

46%
23%

13%
3%

60%
1%

36%
27%

like TV, mobile phones and even air coolers
has increased with 60% of the respondents
attesting to the presence of one or all of the
above in their households after earnings
from the SF programmes. A significant
section of the beneficiaries purchased
bicycles and motorbikes. Expenditure on
agriculture also increased, especially in
investments on tractors, irrigation facilities
and livestock.

155

Soil and Moisture
Conservation
PROGRAMME DESIGN
ITC’s Integrated Watershed Development
programme targets the most disadvantaged
sections of the community _ small and
marginal farmers who are almost entirely
dependent on common property resources,
including water. Extensive Participatory
Rural Appraisal (PRA) exercises identify
target beneficiaries who are constituted
into Water User Groups (WUGs), with priority
on the adequate representation of women.
PRAs also lead to the formation of village
micro-plans that identify optimal watershed
initiatives and detailed planned interventions
including locations, responsibilities for
implementation at various levels and the
financial outlay involved. Though ITC is
the major source of funding, community
contributions range from 20-75%, depending
on their socio-economic conditions. Local
contribution helps generate a high level of
ownership, which leads to more efficient
conservation and use of resources.

Three
new MOUs
were signed with
the Government
of Maharashtra
(for Satara
district) and the
Government
of Madhya
Pradesh (for
Sehore district)
to implement the
government’s
Integrated
Watershed
Management
Programme.

156

WUGs undergo intensive training in
watershed
management
techniques,
structure maintenance, water use regulation
and formulation of user charges. They
plan, implement and monitor all activities
including the building of micro-water
harvesting structures (check dams, village
ponds, percolation tanks, etc.) adopting
suitable water saving technologies and

Activity

soil and moisture conservation measures
(contour bunds, loose boulder contours, gully
plugs, etc.), and eco-restoration through
revegetating common lands. Community
wisdom and local knowledge is an important
input in planning, e.g. the type of structure,
biomass needs, etc. The emphasis is on
using traditional methods in conjunction
with modern techniques to build locationspecific, low-cost structures, relying on local
materials and simple technology. Water user
charges go towards creating a corpus used to
maintain the structures _ a key factor in the
long-term sustainability of the projects.

PERFORMANCE
Commencing in 2000-01, the programme is
currently spread across 1,027 villages in 7
states. 1,234 WUGs have built 4,974 water
harvesting structures and accumulated
a Maintenance Fund of ` 79 lakhs. The
total area brought under soil & moisture
conservation is 1.49 lakh hectares, including
provision of critical irrigation to 50,465
hectares, benefiting 1.27 lakh households.
By extending critical irrigation and improving
water availability throughout the year, the
programme has enabled these farmers
to increase yields (by an average of 20%)
and return to multi-cropping across the
majority of the programme area. To date, the
programme has created 4 million person-days
of employment through construction activities
and the rise in agricultural productivity.
Three new MOUs were signed with the
Government of Maharashtra (for Satara
district) and the Government of Madhya

2012-13

2013-14

Cum to 2013-14

Minor Structures (No)

236

533

2,976

Major Structures (No)

234

300

1,998

Total Structures (No)

470

833

4,974

Area Treated (Hectares)

21,261

19,664

98,325

Critical Irrigation Area (Hectares)

5,375

12,998

50,465

Total Watershed Area (Hectares)

26,636

32,662

148,789

Direct Beneficiaries (No)

19,271

19,426

127,394

EMPL Mandays (Lakhs)

9.21

4.94

40.18

Water Harvesting

Watershed Area

Progress in PPP Projects by Sources

9,078

23,935

21,595

60,197

28,611

14,839

IWDP/IWMP
MGNREGA
NABARD
0%

20%

40%

Pradesh (for Sehore district) to implement
the government’s Integrated Watershed
Management Programme. With this, the total
area to be brought under soil and moisture
conservation through PPP projects has
increased to over 1.58 lakh hectares.
By the end of the financial year, 66% of the
total target area under the NABARD projects
had been completed in the states of Madhya
Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Rajasthan and Bihar. 27% of the target had
been met in the collaboration with State
Governments of Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra
and Rajasthan.

60%

100%

Actual

Balance

IMPACT
Household Incomes: The watershed
development programme in Yavatmal
district (Maharashtra) was implemented
during 2007-12. The impact study of the
project, carried out by Access Livelihoods
Consulting, revealed that income as a result
of the watershed interventions increased
by nearly 50% for both agriculturalists and
farm labourers.
Changes in Household Incomes
Before
After
Intervention Intervention % change
58,036
53%
Agricultural 37,981

Income
Daily Wage
Income

Coverage Area in PPP Projects
by Source

80%

ITC’s
Integrated
Watershed
Development
programme
targets the most
disadvantaged
sections of the
community _
small and marginal farmers who
are almost entirely
dependent on
common
property
resources.

21,126

31,566

49%

52%
23%
27%

MGNREGA

Partner

NABARD

IWDP/IWMP

Area (Hectares)

43,450
NABARD
43,117
Rajasthan Government
Madhya Pradesh Government 23,944
47,744
Maharashtra Government
158,255
Grand Total

157

Groundwater Recharge: The same study
for the Yavatmal watershed project also
showed the change in groundwater status
as a result of the watershed interventions.
The well survey data of the study shows that
increase in the water column was observed
for all seasons, with a significant increase
observed even in the winter months. The
very fact that water is available in the
summer months clearly demonstrates that
the project was successful in ensuring
recharge.
Changes in Water Column (%)

Series 1

Mutually
reinforcing
ITC’s Watershed
Development
programme,
the Sustainable
Agricultural
Practices initiative
promotes a
combination
of solutions to
optimise water
management,
enhance land
productivity and
realise better
incomes through
high value
crops.

158

Summer

Monsoon

Winter

8%

30%

24%

Irrigation Costs: The soil and moisture
conservation programme was started in
Prakasam district (Andhra Pradesh) in
2001 and continues till date. The impact
evaluation of the project, undertaken by
Synergyz Resource Advisory Consultants,
found that water was now available in the
water-harvesting structures for periods
ranging from 25 days to round the year. As
a result, farmers have access to water for at
least one irrigation cycle and sometimes,
depending on the precipitation, for both
cycles. Further, with water now available
locally, the cost of sourcing water has
reduced. Savings, as estimated by the
farmers, average between ` 10,000 –
` 15,000 per acre.

Improved
Agricultural
Practices
PROGRAMME DESIGN
Mutually reinforcing ITC’s Watershed
Development programme, the Sustainable
Agricultural Practices initiative promotes a
combination of solutions to optimise water
management, enhance land productivity

and realise better incomes through high
value crops. These include water saving
technologies (drip and sprinkler systems,
group irrigation wells), the establishment of
compost units (especially as an additional
source of income for women), encouraging
the use of organic compost, promoting
organic and Integrated Pest Management
(IPM) spices and scientific land-use models.

PERFORMANCE
In line with our objective on planned expansion
of sustainable agriculture (SA) practices on a
large scale, there was significant increase in
the number of compost pits, demonstration
plots and Farmer Field Schools (FFS). With the
formation of 37 new Agri Business Centres
(ABC) during the year, the total functional ABCs
stand at 88, that deliver extension services and
knowhow on advanced Package of Practices
(PoP) to over 13,600 farmers.

IMPACT
The combined impact of soil and moisture
conservation and improved agriculture practices
on crop productivity has been very significant in
all the project areas. A study by iKOnet Research
& Consultants for the project in Bhilwara
(Rajasthan) revealed that productivity increased
for almost all crops in both seasons.
Rabi: A 25% increase in productivity of
wheat, a major rabi crop, was observed in
all programme villages. Mustard production
had doubled in the project villages and
productivity of lentils and grams had
increased by nearly 50%.
Rabi - % Increase in Productivity (q/acre)

100%
50%

50%

Lentils

Gram

25%

Wheat

Mustard

Kharif: Productivity of maize and soya,
major kharif crops, increased by 20% and
33% respectively. Yields of urad, cotton and
groundnut increased to more than 50%.
Kharif - % Increase in Productivity (q/acre)

50%

50%

50%

33%

Urad

Cotton Groundnut Soyabean

20%

Maize

The study also found that changes in
productivity were significant compared
to the control plots, where productivity
status was found to be almost similar to the
situation that existed before the project was
introduced in the villages.

159

Factory
Catchments –
Creating Social
Capital
Habitats around industrial clusters are
typically overcrowded and congested.
Infrastructure is poor or creaking under the
pressure of an increasing population base,
drawn to such regions in the hope of gainful
employment. Sanitation facilities are almost
non-existent, creating unhygienic conditions
which have a direct bearing on the high
morbidity rates, especially among women,
a distinctive trait in such settlements. The
exposure to our factories is on two counts:
A concentration of unemployed or underemployed youth with aspirations to work
in our factories but who do not possess the
necessary skills or qualifications to work in
modern production facilities.
Sharp disparities between lifestyles
represent an ever-present threat of our
operations getting disrupted.
The primary focus in the catchment of our
factories is to create the necessary and
enabling pre-conditions for future growth

The
primary focus
in the catchment
of our factories
is to create the
necessary and
enabling preconditions for
future growth
and prosperity
of households
living below the
poverty line.

160

and prosperity of households living below
the poverty line. A few of the fundamental
causes for people feeling disempowered
and apathetic towards their future are lack
of employment opportunities. These are
aggravated by illiteracy and ill-health, which
prevent them from seizing opportunities that
the labour market offers because they are
either unqualified or energy-deficient.

Women’s
Empowerment
PROGRAMME DESIGN
ITC’s Women’s Economic Empowerment
programme mobilises poor women to form
micro-credit Self Help Groups (SHGs).
Members
make
compulsory
monthly
contributions to create an initial corpus
which is built upon with seed money from
ITC. They receive training on managing funds
and handling bank accounts to enable them
to take their own financial decisions. Once
the SHGs mature, financing loans for income
generation activities are given to members,
either from their own corpus or through banks.

Agarbatti Production and Sales

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

Production (MT)

336

834

1445

Sales (` Lakhs)

177

355

855

Women Members

2299

3292

3714

Despatch (Mln. Sticks)

294

367

319

Sales (` Lakhs)

314

445

417

Women Members

42

48

89

Raw Agarbatti

Scenting Unit

PERFORMANCE
Commencing in 2000, the programme
currently supports 1,682 operational SHGs
with 20,230 members and cumulative savings
of ` 3.52 crores. 31,034 women are selfemployed, while 7,731 women are employed
in micro enterprises.
Agarbatti production was given a fillip during the
year with the introduction of pedal machines,
which increased output and, therefore,
incomes for women. 1,368 pedal machines
were operational in the states of Bihar, Uttar
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh and Maharashtra to create livelihoods
for women in rural areas. Production of raw
agarbattis was 1,445 tonnes during the year.
The women owned and managed scenting
units dispatched a total of 319 million sticks
with a turnover of ` 4.17 crores.

IMPACT
The impact assessment of the women-led
micro-enterprise programme in Munger (Bihar),
launched in 2004, was conducted by SHAPE.
The study findings give evidence of a profound
shift in the status of women in these villages:
From homemakers to earners of
independent supplementary income - 74%
of the respondents who had been solely
homemakers, with no independent income
of their own, now cite agarbatti rolling
as their chief source of income. Of those
who were previously earning incomes,
most were engaged in agricultural labour
(6.7%) or sewing (4.5%). Virtually all these
respondents continue to pursue these

activities along with agarbatti rolling which
provides a convenient means to augment
their incomes
Expenditure pattern by virtue of income
from rolling – 87% of respondents stated
that extra income from agarbatti rolling
helped in meeting day-to-day household
expenses, while 53% cite school fees as
their major expenditure, 55% spend on
festivals and family occasions and 24%
were able to spend on house infrastructure.
Better positioned for Savings & Loan
Repayment - The impact was seen to be
more significant in the case of pedal rollers.
About 33% of pedal roller respondents
invested some of their income in savings,
compared to only 9% of hand roller
respondents. Similarly, about 31% of pedal
roller respondents reported that they found
it easier to pay back loans and borrow less
(both in terms of amount and frequency) in
contrast to 4.5% of hand roller respondents.

42,000
Sustainable
livelihoods for rural
women

ITC’s
Women’s
Economic
Empowerment
programme
mobilises poor
women to form
micro-credit
SHGs.

161

Primary Education,
Vocational Training
and Health &
Sanitation
Primary education is one of the major
indicators for raising overall cognitive
development in a child and has a direct
correlation with the country’s Human
Development Indices (HDI). It is equally
important to upgrade skills of youth to better
compete with the emerging needs in the job
market.

3,36,000
Students have been
covered under ITC’s
primary education
programme

An
initiative
called Read
India Plus
Programme was
introduced in the
latter part of the
year that aimed
at improving
education levels
of children in and
around ITC’s
production
units.

162

ITC’s primary education programme provides
furniture, books, teaching aids and structural
additions e.g. classrooms and toilets as
infrastructural assistance to Government
primary schools in the vicinity of its operating
units. Supplementary Learning Centres
(SLCs) set up by the programme provide
additional coaching to help children keep up
in school. Educated unemployed or collegegoing local youth are trained and employed
as tutors in the SLCs which are situated in
premises provided by the community. The
programme also supports
a network of libraries
and
resource
centres
and
builds parental
and community
involvement in
education
through
regular

Activity

interactions and meetings. An initiative called
Read India Plus Programme was introduced
in the latter part of the year that aimed at
improving education levels of children in
and around ITC’s production units. 30,000
new students were covered through all these
above initiatives during the year, taking the
total number of children covered till date
to 3.36 lakhs. Infrastructure support was
provided to 47 government primary schools
during the year, taking the total number to
over 1,011.
More than 2,400 youths were covered this
year by the skill development initiatives,
of which 38% belonged to the SC/ST
communities, thus contributing to the
Company’s affirmative action commitment.
In order to promote hygienic environment
through prevention of open defecation and to
reduce incidence of water-borne diseases, 829
low-cost sanitary latrines were constructed
for poor households on a cost sharing basis,
around the factory locations of Andhra
Pradesh, Bihar, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka.

Conclusion
For India to progress on a path of sustainable
and inclusive growth, and secure long-term
economic competitiveness, ITC believes that it
is imperative that the private sector plays a more
proactive role in the social sector. Anchored
in community based self-help initiatives, the
ultimate aim of ITC’s programmes is to build
self-reliant, empowered local institutions
that can catalyse change at the grassroots
and develop leadership within stakeholder

2012-13

2013-14

Cum to 2013-14

Govt Schools Infra Support

46

47

1,011

Children Covered (Lakhs)

0.40

0.30

3.36

No. of Students (New)

627

2,443

6,315

Placements (No of Students)

681

279

1,197

Sanitary Toilets (No)

352

829

4,676

Health Awarness Camps (No)

63

30

445

Primary Education

Vocational Training

Health & Sanitation

communities. ITC’s CSR programmes are
working towards this objective by building
competencies at the local level – managerial,
administrative and financial capabilities –
that will eventually make the roles of external
funding and implementation agencies
redundant. The aim is to give communities
control over their own resources and enable
them to participate in the formulation and
implementation of development strategies.

The Road Ahead
Going forward, in a continuing affirmation of
our commitment to sustainable and inclusive
growth, we have set the following targets for
the next 3 years:

continue to improve the performance of
the livestock sector in our project villages
by providing integrated services to 4 lakh
additional milch animals, taking the total
number of animals covered to 14 lakhs. More
than 35,000 farmers will benefit through
higher realisations for their milk through
state-of-art milk procurement network and
transparent measurement systems.

WOMEN’S ECONOMIC
EMPOWERMENT
The Company’s women’s empowerment
programme will continue to find avenues
for gainful employment or supplementary
incomes for 3,000 poor women from our
project areas, taking the total coverage to
45,000.

SOCIAL FORESTRY

EDUCATION & SKILLS

In our endeavour to provide fuelwood and
fodder security to small and marginal
farmers, the area to be brought under Social
and Farm Forestry in Andhra Pradesh and
Karnataka will increase by an additional
70,000 hectares, taking the total area to
2.30 lakh hectares.

We will continue to improve the learning
levels of primary school goers by reaching
out to 25,000 additional children, taking the
total to 3.60 lakh children. Acknowledging
the urgency of creating a large pool of
skilled human resources, the vocational
training programme will be ramped up
significantly to cover 36,000 additional
youth, taking the total to 43,000 youth.

WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT

Our
commitment
of improving
the soil moisture
regime of farmers
operating in the
rainfed regions of
the country will
find expression
in watershed
development of
1.30 lakh hectares,
taking the total to
more than 2.80
lakh hectares.

Our commitment of improving the soil
moisture regime of farmers operating in
the rainfed regions of the country will find
expression in watershed development
of 1.30 lakh hectares, taking the total to
more than 2.80 lakh hectares. To provide
critical irrigation to these farmers, 3,000
new water-harvesting structures will be
constructed, taking the total to 8,000
leading to a total freshwater storage of 29
million cubic metres.

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE
To ensure higher yields on a sustainable
basis and lower costs of production,
sustainable agricultural practices will be
significantly ramped up from the current
9,000 hectares to more than 50,000
hectares.

ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
DEVELOPMENT
In order to hedge risks of farmers, we will

163

CREATING
ENDURING
INSTITUTIONS
CII-ITC Centre
of Excellence
for Sustainable
Development
The CII-ITC Centre of Excellence for
Sustainable Development is a co-creation of
the apex national Chamber, the Confederation
of Indian Industry, and ITC. With its abiding
objective of promoting sustainability
amongst corporates, the Centre is engaged in
a wide spectrum of value-added and targeted
initiatives that create awareness, provide
thought leadership, build capacity amongst
Indian enterprises and reward exemplary
performances.

With
its abiding
objective of
promoting
sustainability
amongst
corporates,
the Centre is
engaged in a
wide spectrum
of value-added
and targeted
initiatives that
create awareness,
provide thought
leadership, build
capacity amongst
Indian enterprises
and reward
exemplary
performances.

164

During the year, the Centre has made a
meaningful contribution in drafting rules
for Section 135 of the Companies Act 2013.
The Centre was also awarded a four-year
EU Switch Asia project titled ‘Green Retail
India’ to promote sustainable development
of India’s food and beverage retail sector.
The Centre has also partnered with the
International Integrated Reporting Council
(IIRC) to promote Integrated Reporting (IR)
in India. The Centre will further constitute an
IR business network in the country to provide
Indian business ownership in the development
and implementation of the IR framework.
Based on a request from The Ministry of
Environment & Forests (MoEF) the Centre is
hosting the India Business and Biodiversity
Initiative (IBBI) platform. This national level
initiative will represent India’s business sector
at the UN Global Business and Biodiversity
Initiative. Over the last year, the Centre also
published several case studies and research
papers on Sustainability and CSR.

The Centre also instituted the world’s first
corporate sustainability label, “Sustainable
Plus”, that provides a brand identity tool for
companies to communicate that they are
sustainable, responsible and well-governed.
The Centre’s 31 open programmes and 40 incompany programmes on a gamut of areas
including Value Innovation, Sustainability
Reporting, Stakeholder Engagement, Social
Return on Investment (SRoI), Supply Chain,
and Corporate Sustainability Performance
management, conducted both in India and
abroad, reached out to over 2,700 participants.
The 8th Annual Sustainability Solutions
Summit continued its legacy of bringing
together thought-and-action leaders from
across the globe to discuss and propagate
innovative and actionable solutions towards
building a more sustainable future. The
Centre also recognises and rewards the
most significant contributions to sustainable
development in the country through the CIIITC Sustainability Awards.
The Centre is today playing a major role in
engaging with policy makers to create an
environment that encourages the adoption
of sustainable business practices. The Centre
is a consulting partner in several policy
interventions such as Green Guidelines for
Public Procurement, Low Carbon Expert
Group of the Planning Commission, National
Innovation Council, Ministry of Corporate
Affairs on CSR Policy, National Awards
for Prevention of Pollution, Rajiv Gandhi
Environment Awards for Clean Technology
and Technology and Finance Committee
under the Montreal Protocol. It is also
represented on the Board of the Central
Pollution Control Board and other bodies.

ITC Sangeet
Research Academy
The ITC Sangeet Research Academy (ITC-SRA)
is a true embodiment of sustained corporate
commitment to a priceless national heritage.
It is a unique institution which has been at
the forefront of disseminating the ancient
tradition of Hindustani Classical Music. The
Academy is also recognised for being the
finest repository of Hindustani Classical

Music. With a commitment that has remained
consistent for over 37 years, ITC-SRA is the
world’s first and only professionally managed
modern Gurukul, blending scientific research
and technology methods with the purity of
the age old Guru-Shishya tradition. While
relentlessly focusing on Hindustani Classical
Music, the Academy has also expanded
its performance watershed to include the
Carnatic genre as well as the rich heritage
of folk music of Bengal. The Academy is
currently engaged in carrying the message
of Hindustani Classical Music across our
country from the metros to rural India.
Recent forays into neighbouring Bangladesh
have brought home another dimension of
the shared sub-continental heritage. The
Academy also constantly endeavours to work
together with other music organisations and
institutions of repute.

With a
commitment
that has
remained
consistent for
over 37 years, ITCSRA is the world’s
first and only
professionally
managed modern
Gurukul, blending
scientific research
methods and
technology
methods with the
purity of the age
old Guru-Shishya
tradition.

165

Management
Approach
The
Company
has established
stringent
processes and
systems to ensure
that all products
and services
are in total
compliance with
all regulatory
requirements.

166

CUSTOMER HEALTH AND
SAFETY
Given ITC’s presence in the FMCG and
Hospitality sectors, its products and services
can have a direct impact on the health and
safety of consumers and other stakeholders.
The Company has accordingly established
stringent processes and systems to ensure
that all products and services are in total
compliance with all regulatory requirements.
In addition, product and service attributes
are constantly evaluated to ensure progress
towards compliance with best international
standards and practices. This is an integral
part of the Company’s DNA and all efforts are
made to ensure that there is no deviation on
this account.

Our uncompromising commitment to
ensuring compliance with relevant standards
of health and safety commences at the
design stage, wherein appropriate health
and safety elements across manufacturing,
delivery and consumption are identified
and evaluated, and control measures
implemented as and when necessary.
New products are developed after careful
consideration of global developments. This
is supported by comprehensive research
and testing facilities at the ITC Life Sciences
& Technology Centre, whose laboratories
conform to ISO/IEC 17025 and are certified
by National Accreditation Board for Testing
and Calibration (NABL). ITC uses proprietary
software for regular monitoring and review
of stringent raw materials specifications.
Manufacturing units and hotels have stateof-the-art facilities, cutting edge technology
and internationally benchmarked quality

management systems, which are constantly
reviewed and upgraded. For businesses
that make use of third party manufacturing
facilities, the quality performance of each
manufacturer is monitored on a daily basis.

Business

Agri - Business

The summary of systems and initiatives
across some of our businesses is listed out in
the following table:

Initiatives for improvement of health and safety
impacts of products/ services
The Business primarily engages in sourcing of agri-commodities
like Wheat, Coffee, Potato, Shrimps, Soya and Processed Fruits.
These commodities are sourced and supplied based on customer
requirements of quality, quantity and packaging. Hence, there is no
direct assessment of the health and safety aspects of the product.
However, stringent process control and quality inspection norms
have been established to ensure the quality of all products. All
items are stored according to specifications in warehouses, which
are selected based on prescribed norms. Systems and processes
are in place to ensure the hygiene of the stored stocks. Products are
shipped after meticulous testing either in-house, or at accredited
labs or agencies, if required by customers. For processed fruit
products that cater to specific customer segments, the Business
has received the following international certifications for its
organic and sustainable farm practices processed fruits business
to cater to specific customer segments:

Manufacturing
units and hotels
have state-ofthe-art facilities,
cutting edge
technology and
internationally
benchmarked
quality
management
systems, which
are constantly
reviewed and
upgraded.

167

Business

Initiatives for improvement of health and safety
impacts of products/ services
Fairtrade certification endorsing that its products meet certain
environmental, labour, and developmental standards

Agri - Business

Demeter Certification for Biodynamic Farming, a holistic method
of agriculture
USDA Organic Certification for Organic Farming
Bio-Suisse Certification for Organic Farming

52
out of 63
manufacturing
locations,
including
third party
manufacturing
units of Foods
Business, are
Hazard Analysis
and Critical
Control Point
(HACCP)/ ISO
22000
certified.

168

Foods

52 out of 63 manufacturing locations, including third party
manufacturing units, are Hazard Analysis and Critical Control
Point (HACCP)/ ISO 22000 certified, ensuring that products use the
best quality ingredients and utilise the highest quality processes.
The objective is to continuously provide consumers with products
that not only “Taste Good” but also “Do Good”. Consequently,
large investments are made towards R&D on products to deliver
relevant functionalities based upon specific formulations for
specific health needs, like reducing salt, sugar and oil across all
products. These processes will start showing results over the next
few years. Recently launched products like ‘Sunfeast Oats Marie’
and the newly launched ‘Sunfeast Farmlite’ attempt to seamlessly
integrate healthy ingredients like oats and fibre into consumer
snacking preferences.

Cigarettes

The Business uses proprietary software to regularly monitor and
review stringent product specifications of all raw materials. With
consistent focus on product innovation, new product development
in the Business involves consideration of global developments
and is supported by comprehensive research and testing facilities
at the ITC Life Sciences & Technology Centre, where laboratories
conform to ISO/IEC 17025 standards and are certified by NABL.

Leaf Tobacco

Product hygiene standards in tobacco cultivation are accorded
the highest importance. Accordingly, awareness among tobacco
farmers on the importance of producing sustainable quality
tobacco with residue free product is constantly reinforced during
field-level trainings and seminars in ITC’s operating region. For
frequent assessment on product integrity, farm-level and packedlevel toxicant audit studies are undertaken wherein all leaf
samples from farmlands and packed cases of finished products
are closely monitored for toxicant residues. Several additional
measures were implemented across the value chain during the
year towards minimisation of Non Tobacco Related Matter (NTRM).

Personal
Care Products

The Business follows a comprehensive approach for improving
the health and safety impacts of its products in each of the
following life cycle stages:
Research and development
All safety tests from prototype development to final product are
conducted in accordance with standard international guidelines

Business

Initiatives for improvement of health and safety
impacts of products/ services
Research and Development
Ingredients used in products undergo rigorous analysis, based on
existing scientific literature, for their toxicity and skin sensitisation
prior to clearance for use in product development
Certification

Personal
Care Products

Product safety and efficacy is certified through external accredited
laboratories
Manufacturing and production
Products are manufactured under strict hygienic conditions and in
an automated environment
Documented Quality Management System, including procured
material checks, in-process checks and finished goods quality
checks, ensures that the manufactured products are consistent
and of high quality.

Hotels

ITC Maurya, ITC Mughal, ITC Maratha, ITC Grand Central, ITC Sonar,
IT Windsor, ITC Kakatiya, ITC Rajputana, Sheraton New Delhi and
My Fortune Chennai have established food safety management
systems certified as per HACCP/ ISO 22000. ITC Hotels R&D
endeavours to adhere to GHP & GMP (Good Hygiene Practices &
Good Manufacturing Practices) along with the ISO 22000 food
safety management system. The Hotels Business also conforms
to relevant applications of PAS 220 (Prerequisite programmes on
food safety for food manufacturing). In addition, to ensure the life
safety of all customers, ITC has elaborate fire safety guidelines
which have to be complied with by all Hotels. These guidelines
are based upon National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
Codes and other international best practices. They supplement
the general EHS Guidelines applicable to all ITC’s businesses, the
compliance to which is audited by the Corporate EHS Department
on a regular basis.

Education and
Stationery
Products

The Business uses only approved non-hazardous materials, like
ECF (Elemental Chlorine Free) paper, ink, dyes etc. Since the
primary consumers of these products are children, stringent
processes and quality control measures are in place to ensure that
their safety is not compromised in any manner.

Lifestyle
Retailing

All raw materials and garments are tested at the in-house laboratory
for post usage experience and conformance to quality standards.
The standards and product specifications are periodically validated
by international testing agencies. Quality is monitored through
an internal Product Quality Rating System (PQRS) together with
the external Acceptable Quality Level (AQL) norm that is followed
internationally by apparel businesses. The Wills Lifestyle brand
has received the “Oeko-Tex” certification (w.e.f. January 2012),
becoming the first brand in the domestic apparel retail segment
in India to obtain such a recognition. The certification has been
conferred by Hohenstein Textile Testing Institute GmbH & Co.

ITC
Hotels R&D
endeavours
to adhere to
GHP & GMP
(Good Hygiene
Practices & Good
Manufacturing
Practices) along
with the ISO
22000 food safety
management
system.

169

Business

Various
initiatives
have been
undertaken
in developing
packaging
solutions that
use environment
friendly raw
materials such
as water-based
varnishes and
reduction in
material usage
in terms of mass
and thickness
reduction in
products.

170

Initiatives for improvement of health and safety
impacts of products/ services

Lifestyle
Retailing

KG, Germany. It guarantees that the products are free from more
than 100 substances that are potentially dangerous to human life
and ensures that Wills Lifestyle garments are completely safe for
consumers, while at the same time maintaining a relevant style
quotient in its products.

Packaging
and Printing

Various initiatives have been undertaken in developing packaging
solutions that use environment friendly raw materials such as
water-based varnishes and reduction in material usage in terms of
mass and thickness reduction in products. The Business engages
with customers on a continuous basis to provide solutions that
help protect functional needs like product integrity and visual
imagery, whilst providing scope for use of alternate materials. The
bulk of board packaging is already being done with non-toluene
based inks. In the area of flexibles packaging, joint projects with
customers have been undertaken to promote biodegradable
flexibles packaging and printing with non-toluene and non-ketone
based inks. In order to strengthen the health & safety requirement
of products, all operations at the Haridwar factory and flexibles
operations at the Tiruvottiyur Unit have been certified as per
British Retail Consortium (BRC) Global Standard for Packaging
and Packaging Materials.

Paperboards
and Specialty
Papers

ITC has been the pioneer in manufacturing Elemental Chlorine
Free (ECF) pulp in India. This ensures that the levels of dioxins
and furans in the pulp are less than 1 PPT (Parts Per Trillion).
The global migration test is conducted periodically on all foodgrade paper and paperboards for compliance with the US FDA
standards and to adhere to prescribed limits for presence of heavy
metals. All manufacturing ingredients are procured from reputed
suppliers and conform to US FDA and equivalent standards. The
Business ensures that the components of food allergens listed
in the EC directive 2003/89/ EC and the US FDA Act are not
used in any virgin grade boards and papers. The Bollaram Unit,
which manufactures food grade board for direct food contact, is
‘third party’ certified in accordance with BRC/IoP (British Retail
Consortium/Institute of Packaging) standards. Smithers Pira, a
renowned testing and consultancy firm, certifies ITC’s ‘Indobarr’
and ‘Cyber Propac’ brands to be compliant with German BFR
standards for Food Packaging.

Matches and
Agarbatti

Chemicals approved by IFRA (International Fragrance Resource
Association, Geneva) are used to prepare fragrances, which are
required in the manufacture of dipped Mangaldeep agarbattis. The
manufacturing processes of the Matches and Agarbatti Business
are designed to ensure product safety and consistency.

As an
organisation
which makes
comprehensive
efforts to ensure
legitimacy,
transparency and
good governance,
ITC’s business
operations strive
to comply with
every relevant
law of the
nation.

Product
Information and
Labelling
As
an
organisation
which
makes
comprehensive efforts to ensure legitimacy,
transparency and good governance, ITC’s
business operations strive to comply with
every relevant law of the nation. Systems

Reports
Analysed
Scores are generated
for the hotel and the
individual
departments
Scores are
compared against
targets set

have been put in place to ensure compliance
before the launch of any new category or
product.
Regular customer feedback system forms an
integral part of B2C businesses, like Hotels,
Information Technology, Cigarettes as well
as other FMCG businesses, where there is
direct interface with customers. Represented
below is the customer satisfaction survey
followed by ITC’s Hotels Business.

Improvements
Identified and
Implemented
Data is analysed
to identify areas of
improvement
Corrective action
is taken

Monitored
and Verified
Scores are
monitored to ensure
that corrective
action has been
effective
Audits are
conducted to
check efficacy of
the changes

171

In the case of FMCG products, consumers are
provided several communication channels
like email, telephone number, website
address and feedback forms to enable
them to contact the relevant business.
Processes are laid down to ensure that
consumers are provided with responses on
their feedback in a timely manner. In the
Information Technology Business also, there
are formal mechanisms in place to measure
customer experience. The Customer Service
Satisfaction Survey is an annual check on the
robustness of the engagement, culminating
in a Customer Experience Index. The survey
is conducted amongst Chief Executives
and Senior Management, and is based on
a structured questionnaire customised
for the recipient. Multiple parameters and
business outcomes are measured including
satisfaction, loyalty, advocacy and value
for money. The outcomes and insights from
the survey drive customer engagement and
service delivery improvement initiatives at
the organisation, geography, business unit
and account level.

ITC
follows
standard
operating
procedures to
ensure that
its marketing
communication
is in accordance
with voluntary
codes adopted
by each
business and
the applicable
statutes.

172

On the other hand, customer feedback
for B2B businesses like Agri Business and
Packaging and Printing, is obtained through
different activities. For example, Agri
Business has pre-season engagement with
customers, client visits and engagement of
the Divisional Management Committees with
major customers. Given the nature of the
business, claims due to rejections on account
of quality are a valuable indicator of customer
dissatisfaction. During the year under review,
no such claims were made to the Business.

Marketing
Communications
All Businesses/Divisions of ITC have
established rigorous systems, procedures
and review mechanisms to identify and
comply with the laws and regulations
concerning marketing communications. In
addition, ITC has put in place a dedicated
consumer response cell in order to answer
any queries on the product.
ITC follows standard operating procedures to
ensure that its marketing communications
are in accordance with voluntary codes
adopted by each business and the applicable
statutes. These are vetted by the internal
legal team and compliance is ensured by the
internal audit department.
Marketing and Advertising Communications
of all ITC’s businesses are subjected to
stringent internal checks by the Legal
Department. The Company’s consumer
goods businesses adhere to voluntary and
legal codes of conduct and follow the ASCI
(Advertising Standards Council of India) Code
for all marketing communications. During
the year, a marketing communication on a
new product category was reworked based
on the direction received from ASCI.
Marketing communications for ITC’s Hotels
Business is governed by self-regulation and
guided by the Indian Society of Advertisers
(ISA) rules and guidelines.

Customer Privacy

Compliance

Maintenance of customer privacy is relevant
primarily for ITC’s Information Technology
and Hotels Businesses, both of which have
well established systems and procedures
for ensuring zero non-compliance. Network
Architecture and Information Security
controls are driven by industry best practices.
The Business has drafted a privacy policy
in line with the IT Act, 2000, that covers
all aspects of data privacy with respect to
sensitive information. The Business has also
formulated an Information Management
policy, which caters to the IT security aspects
of the ISO 27001 ISMS framework. The IT
operations arm of ITC Infotech Limited is ISO
27001 certified for its business processes to
deliver IT services and projects. Documented
procedures are available and practised to
grant physical access to information, e.g.
the defined and restricted access rights
to IT Room/Server Room and User Access
Management based on ISO 27001 and as
agreed with customers. The Business has also
put in place measures at various control areas
in order to meet customers’ requirements for
data security. These include desktop access,
server access, network access, operating
system, application security, data transfer,
penetration testing, etc. Clear guidelines are
provided for data backup, retention periods,
the media on which backups have to be
maintained and storage at remote location.

All Businesses/Divisions of ITC have well
established systems, procedures and review
mechanisms to identify and comply with the
laws and regulations concerning its products
and services. Particular care is accorded
to tobacco products, taking into account
the regulatory framework as well as social
expectations of responsible tobacco usage.

In addition, stringent risk assessments are
carried out to identify vulnerabilities and
threats to assets and the controls that need
to be put in place.

Performance
ITC’s Hotels and Information Technology
Businesses received no complaints regarding
breach of customer privacy or loss of customer
data in 2013-14. For the year 2013-14, the
average WoW Ratio (Guest Satisfaction
Index) for the Hotels Business was 91.70%.

ITC has established systems wherein every
Business and Corporate Department has to
submit a periodic statutory compliance report
to the CMC/Board on all business regulatory,
product specific, finance/revenue related,
personnel related, technical/process related
and environment related statutes and other
applicable laws and regulations applicable.
This is done on the basis of updated checklists
that have to be mandatorily maintained by
each reporting Unit/Business/function as
well as monitoring and controlling systems
that the Business/Corporate function must
have in place.
As per this system, there were no incidents
of non-compliance reported during 2013-14.

The Road Ahead

ITC has
established
systems wherein
every Business
and Corporate
Department
has to submit a
periodic statutory
compliance report
to the CMC/Board
on all business
regulatory,
product specific,
finance/revenue
related, personnel
related, technical/
process related
and environment
related statutes
and other
applicable laws
and regulations
applicable.

In order to further improve the health
and safety impacts of products, the Foods
Business is working on ways to progressively
introduce biodegradable/recyclable packaging
solutions. Such solutions will be developed
to ensure that they do not compromise
with product integrity, while addressing the
issues related to packaging materials that
are dictated by the unique characteristics of
India in terms of both climatic and logistical
conditions. Specific programmes have also
been initiated by ITC’s Packaging and Printing
Business for environment friendly products
such as using low migration inks for direct
food packaging and moving from recycled to
virgin boards wherever there is direct contact
with food.

173

GRI - G4 Indicators Index
GRI - G4 Disclosures
General Standard Disclosures

UNGC - COP
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation
of Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Page
Number

G4-1

Statement from the
most senior decision-maker
of the organisation
about the relevance of
sustainability
to the organisation
and the organisation’s
strategy for addressing
sustainability

Statement of
continuing support

04-09

-

-

G4-2

Description of
key impacts, risks,
and opportunities

*

44-53

-

-

Indicator

Description

STRATEGY AND ANALYSIS

ORGANISATIONAL PROFILE

174

G4-3

Name of the organisation

*

12

-

-

G4-4

Primary brands, products,
and services

*

14-23

-

-

G4-5

Location of the organisation’s
headquarters

*

54

-

-

G4-6

Number of countries where
the organisation operates

*

12

-

-

G4-7

Nature of ownership and
legal form

*

Report and
Accounts
2014

-

-

G4-8

Markets served

*

12

-

-

G4-9

Scale of the organisation

*

12

-

-

G4-10

Details on workforce broken
down by gender, employment
contract, employment
type etc.

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 6

132-133

-

-

G4-11

Percentage of total employees
covered by collective
bargaining agreements

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 3

132

-

-

UNGC - COP
Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures
General Standard Disclosures

Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation
of Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Page
Number

*

24-27

-

-

-

-

Indicator

Description

G4-12

Description of the
organisation’s supply chain

G4-13

Significant changes during the
reporting period regarding the
organisation’s size, structure,
ownership, or its supply chain

*

12-23,
Report and
Accounts
2014

G4-14

How the precautionary
approach or principle is
addressed by the organisation

Actions taken
to implement
Principle 7

67

-

-

G4-15

Externally developed
economic, environmental and
social charters, principles, or
other initiatives to which the
organisation subscribes or
which it endorses

United Nations
Global Compact
(UNGC) - This
Sustainability
Report is used
to communicate
progress on
implementation of
UNGC Principles

04

-

-

G4-16

Memberships of associations
and national/ international
advocacy organisations in
which the organisation holds
a position on the governance
body and participates in
projects or committees

*

203-204

-

-

G4-17

Entities included in the
organisation’s consolidated
financial statements with
indication of coverage in
the report

*

54-59

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-18

Process for defining the
report content and the
Aspect Boundaries

*

41

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-19

Material Aspects identified
in the process for defining
report content

*

42

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-20

Description of Aspect
Boundary within the
organisation for each
material aspect

*

54-57

-

Yes/
205-207

IDENTIFIED MATERIAL ASPECTS AND BOUNDARIES

175

GRI - G4 Disclosures
General Standard Disclosures

UNGC - COP
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation
of Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Page
Number

Indicator

Description

G4-21

Description of Aspect
Boundary outside the
organisation for each
material aspect

*

24-25, 54-55,
93, 95, 117,
32-41

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-22

Explanation of the effect
of any re-statement of
information provided in the
earlier Reports

*

No restatement of
information

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-23

Significant changes from
previous reporting periods
in the Scope and
Aspect Boundaries

*

54

-

Yes/
205-207

STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
G4-24

List of stakeholder groups
engaged by the organisation

Sharing COP with
Stakeholders

32-33

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-25

Basis for identification and
selection of stakeholders with
whom to engage

Sharing COP with
Stakeholders

32-33

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-26

Organisation’s approach to
stakeholder engagement

Sharing COP with
Stakeholders

32-33, 40-41

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-27

Key topics and concerns that
have been raised through
stakeholder engagement,
and how the organisation has
responded to those key topics
and concerns

Sharing COP with
Stakeholders

34-40

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-28

Reporting Period

*

54

-

-

G4-29

Date of most recent
previous Report

*

54

-

-

G4-30

Reporting cycle

*

54

-

-

REPORT PROFILE

176

GRI - G4 Disclosures
General Standard Disclosures

UNGC - COP
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation
of Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Page
Number

Indicator

Description

G4-31

Contact point for questions
regarding the report or its
contents

*

54

-

-

G4-32

GRI Content Index

*

174-194

-

-

G4-33

Organisation’s policy and
current practice with regard
to seeking external assurance
for the report; relationship
with the assurance providers;
the highest governance
body’s involvement in
seeking assurance
for the organisation’s
Sustainability Report

*

56

-

-

G4-34

Governance structure of the
organisation; committees
responsible for decisionmaking on economic,
environmental and
social impacts

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

60-64

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-35

Process for delegating
authority for economic,
environmental and social
topics from the highest
governance body to
senior executives and
other employees

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

63-64

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-36

Executive-level positions with
responsibility for economic,
environmental and
social topics

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

61-64

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-37

Processes for consultation
between stakeholders and the
highest governance body on
economic, environmental and
social topics

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

64

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-38

Composition of the highest
governance body and its
committees

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

62-64

-

Yes/
205-207

GOVERNANCE

177

GRI - G4 Disclosures
General Standard Disclosures

178

UNGC - COP
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation
of Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Page
Number

Indicator

Description

G4-39

Function of the Chair of the
highest governance body
within the organisation’s
management and the reasons
for his arrangement as an
executive officer

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

65

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-40

Nomination and selection
processes for the highest
governance body and its
committees; the criteria used
for nominating and selecting
highest governance
body members

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

62-64

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-41

Processes for the highest
governance body to ensure
conflicts of interest are
avoided and managed;
disclosure of conflicts of
interest to stakeholders

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

65

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-42

Highest governance body’s
and senior executives’
roles in the development,
approval, and updating of
the organisation’s purpose,
value or mission statements,
strategies, policies, and
goals related to economic,
environmental and
social impacts

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

63-64

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-43

Measures taken to develop
and enhance the highest
governance body’s collective
knowledge of economic,
environmental and
social topics

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

66

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-44

Processes for evaluation
of the highest governance
body’s performance with
respect to governance of
economic, environmental and
social topics; actions taken in
response to evaluation results

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

66

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-45

Highest governance body’s
role in the identification
and management of
economic, environmental
and social impacts, risks,
and opportunities; use of
stakeholder consultation for
supporting the process

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

63-64, 67

-

Yes/
205-207

GRI - G4 Disclosures
General Standard Disclosures

UNGC - COP
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation
of Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Page
Number

Indicator

Description

G4-46

Highest governance
body’s role in reviewing
the effectiveness of
the organisation’s risk
management processes for
economic, environmental and
social topics

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

63-64, 67

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-47

Frequency of the highest
governance body’s review of
economic, environmental and
social impacts, risks,
and opportunities

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

62

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-48

Highest committee or position
that formally reviews and
approves the organisation’s
sustainability report and
ensures that all material
Aspects are covered

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

63-64

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-49

Process for communicating
critical concerns to the
highest governance body

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

63-64

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-50

Nature and total number
of critical concerns that
were communicated to the
highest governance body and
the mechanism(s) used to
address and resolve them

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

63-64, 67

-

-

G4-51

Remuneration policies for
the highest governance body
and senior executives; how
performance criteria in the
remuneration policy relate
to the highest governance
body’s and senior executives’
economic, environmental
and social objectives

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

66

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-52

Process for determining
remuneration

*

66

-

-

G4-53

How stakeholders’ views
are sought and taken
into account regarding
remuneration

*

66

-

-

G4-54

Ratio of the annual total
compensation for the
organisation’s highest-paid
individual to the median
annual total compensation
for all employees (excluding
the highest-paid individual)

*

66

-

-

179

GRI - G4 Disclosures
General Standard Disclosures

UNGC - COP
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation
of Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Page
Number

*

66

-

-

G4-56

Organisation’s values,
principles, standards and
norms of behavior such as
codes of conduct and codes
of ethics

Actions taken
to implement
principles 10

66-67,
196-197

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-57

Internal and external
mechanisms for seeking
advice on ethical and lawful
behavior, and matters related
to organisational integrity

Actions taken
to implement
principles 10

66-67

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-58

Internal and external
mechanisms for reporting
concerns about unethical
or unlawful behavior,
and matters related to
organisational integrity

Actions taken
to implement
principles 10

66-67

-

-

Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation
of Principles

Page
Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Page Number

Indicator

Description

G4-55

Ratio of percentage increase
in annual total compensation
for the organisation’s
highest-paid individual to the
median percentage increase
in annual total compensation
for all employees (excluding
the highest-paid individual)

ETHICS AND INTEGRITY

Specific Standard Disclosures - Material Aspects
DMA and
Indicators

Description

CATEGORY: ECONOMIC
MATERIAL ASPECT: ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE

180

G4-DMA

Generic Disclosures on
Management Approach (DMA)

*

70

-

-

G4-EC1

Direct economic value
generated and distributed

*

70-74

-

-

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures Material Aspects
Indicator

Description

UNGC - COP
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation
of Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Page
Number

-

G4-EC2

Financial implications and
other risks and opportunities
for the organisation’s
activities due to
climate change

Action taken on
Principle 7

-

We have not disclosed
the following
information owing
to unavailability
of appropriate
framework and
reliable information
needed for
representative
estimation
of the financial
implications of the
risk or opportunity.
We will evaluate
appropriate
framework for
complete disclosure
on this indicator
within next 3-5
years.

G4-EC3

Coverage of the organisation’s
defined benefit plan
obligations

*

78-79

-

-

G4-EC4

Financial assistance received
from government

*

76

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: INDIRECT ECONOMIC IMPACTS
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

*

80

-

-

G4-EC7

Development and impact of
infrastructure investments
and services supported

*

81

-

-

G4-EC8

Significant indirect economic
impacts, including the extent
of impacts

*

148-162

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: PROCUREMENT PRACTICES
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

*

75

-

-

G4-EC9

Proportion of spending on
local suppliers

*

75

-

-

181

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures Material Aspects
Indicator

Description

UNGC - COP
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation
of Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

External
Assurance/
Page
Number

Omissions

Actions taken
to implement
principles 7, 8, 9

84-87

-

-

CATEGORY: ENVIRONMENTAL
G4-DMA

Generic Disclosures on
Management Approach (DMA)

MATERIAL ASPECT: MATERIALS
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
principles 7,8

118-119, 121

-

-

G4-EN1

Materials used by weight
or volume

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 7,8

119

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-EN2

Percentage of materials
used that are recycled
input materials

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8

119-120

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: ENERGY
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
principles 7,8,9

88-89, 93

-

-

G4-EN3

Energy consumption within
the organisation

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 7,8

89-92

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-EN4

Energy consumption outside
of the organisation

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8

93

-

-

G4-EN5

Energy intensity

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8

91-92

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-EN6

Reduction of energy
consumption

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8,9

90

-

-

G4-EN7

Reductions in energy
requirements of products and
services

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8,9

90

-

-

Actions taken
to implement
principles 7,8

100-102, 111

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: WATER
G4-DMA

182

Aspect-specific DMA

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures Material Aspects

UNGC - COP
Elements

Indicator

Description

Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation
of Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Page
Number

G4-EN8

Total water withdrawal by
source

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 7,8

102-107

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-EN9

Water sources significantly
affected by withdrawal of
water

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8

111

-

-

G4-EN10

Percentage and total volume
of water recycled and reused

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8

108, 111

-

Yes/
205-207

122-125

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: BIODIVERSITY
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
principles 8

G4-EN11

Operational sites owned,
leased, managed in, or
adjacent to, protected areas
and areas of high biodiversity
value outside protected areas

-

G4-EN12

Description of significant
impacts of activities,
products, and services on
biodiversity in protected areas
and areas of high biodiversity
value outside protected areas

-

-

G4-EN13

Habitats protected or restored

-

-

G4-EN14

Total number of IUCN Red
List species and national
conservation list species with
habitats in areas affected
by operations, by level of
extinction risk

-

-

None of ITC’s
operational sites
are owned, leased,
managed in, or
are adjacent to,
protected areas
and areas of high
biodiversity value,
therefore, these
standard disclosures
are not applicable.

-

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: EMISSIONS
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
principles 7,8,9

94, 97, 99

-

-

G4-EN15

Direct greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions (Scope 1)

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 7,8

95

-

Yes/
205-207,
208-210

G4-EN16

Energy indirect greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions
(Scope 2)

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 7,8

95

-

Yes/
205-207,
208-210

G4-EN17

Other indirect greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions
(Scope 3)

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 7,8

95

-

Yes/
205-207,
208-210

183

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures Material Aspects

UNGC - COP
Elements

Indicator

Description

Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation
of Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Page
Number

G4-EN18

Greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions intensity

Outcomes on
Principle 7,8,9

96-97

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-EN19

Reduction of greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions

Outcomes on
Principle 7,8,9

97

-

-

G4-EN20

Emissions of ozone-depleting
substances (ODS)

Outcomes on
Principle 7,8

99

-

-

G4-EN21

NOX, SOX, and other
significant air emissions

Outcomes on
Principle 7,8

97-99

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: EFFLUENTS AND WASTE
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
principles 8

100-102, 112113, 117

-

-

G4-EN22

Total water discharge by
quality and destination

Outcomes from
implementing
principle 8

108-110

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-EN23

Total weight of waste by type
and disposal method

Outcomes from
implementing
principle 8

113-117

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-EN24

Total number and volume of
significant spills

Outcomes from
implementing
principle 8

99

-

-

-

G4-EN25

Weight of transported,
imported, exported, or treated
waste deemed hazardous
under the terms of the Basel
Convention Annex I, II, III,
and VIII, and percentage of
transported waste shipped
internationally

Outcomes from
implementing
principle 8

-

This standard
disclosure is not
applicable as there
was no transport,
import, export
or treatment of
waste deemed
hazardous under the
terms of the Basel
Convention Annex I,
II, III and VIII.

G4-EN26

Identity, size, protected
status, and biodiversity
value of water bodies and
related habitats signifcantly
affected by the organisation’s
discharges of water and
runoff

Outcomes from
implementing
principle 8

111

-

-

Outcomes from
implementing
Principles 7,8,9

90

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: PRODUCTS AND SERVICES

G4-EN27

184

Extent of impact mitigation
of environmental impacts of
products and services

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures Material Aspects
Indicator

G4-EN28

Description

Percentage of products
sold and their packaging
materials that are reclaimed
by category

UNGC - COP
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation
of Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Page
Number

-

In 2013-14, we have
not reported on
this indicator due
to unavailability of
reliable information.
We are making
efforts to address
this issue and we
expect to report on
this aspect by 2015

-

Actions taken
to implement
principles 7,8,9

119-121, 122125

-

-

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8

173

-

Yes/
205-207

Outcomes from
implementing
Principles 7,8

95-97

-

-

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8

MATERIAL ASPECT: SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT

DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

MATERIAL ASPECT: COMPLIANCE

G4-EN29

Monetary value of significant
fines and total number of
non-monetary sanctions
for non-compliance with
environmental laws and
regulations

MATERIAL ASPECT: TRANSPORT

G4-EN30

Significant environmental
impacts of transporting
products and other goods
and materials for the
organisation’s operations,
and transporting members
of the workforce

CATEGORY: SOCIAL
SUB-CATEGORY: LABOR PRACTICES AND DECENT WORK
MATERIAL ASPECT: EMPLOYMENT
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken to
implement Principle
3,4,5,6

128-132

-

-

G4-LA1

Total number and rates of new
employee hires and employee
turnover by age group, gender
and region

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 6

132-134

-

Yes/
205-207

185

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures Material Aspects

UNGC - COP
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation
of Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Page
Number

Indicator

Description

G4-LA2

Benefits provided to fulltime employees that are
not provided to temporary
or part-time employees,
by significant locations of
operation

-

134

-

-

G4-LA3

Return to work and retention
rates after parental leave,
by gender

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 6

134

-

-

Minimum
notice periods
regarding
operational
changes
form part of
long term
agreements
with
employees.

-

Yes/
205-207

MATERIAL ASPECT: LABOR/MANAGEMENT RELATIONS

G4-LA4

Minimum notice periods
regarding operational
changes, including whether
these are specified in
collective agreements

Outcomes from
implementation of
Priciple 3

MATERIAL ASPECT: OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY

186

G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

-

136-138, 142

-

-

G4-LA5

Percentage of total workforce
represented in formal joint
management-worker health
and safety committees that
help monitor and advise on
occupational health and
saftey programs

*

137

-

-

G4-LA6

Type of injury and rates of
injury, occupational diseases,
lost days, and absenteeism,
and total number of workrelated fatalities

*

138-142

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-LA7

Workers with high incidence
or high risk of diseases
related to their occupation

*

141-142

-

-

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures Material Aspects
Indicator

G4-LA8

Description

Health and safety topics
covered in formal agreements
with trade unions

UNGC - COP
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation
of Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Page
Number

*

-

Health and safety
topics are covered
in long term
agreements with
employees. In the
absence of a system
for capturing the
relevant information
business-wise, we
have not reported
on this indicator in
2013-14. However
we expect to be able
to report from 201415 onwards.

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: TRAINING AND EDUCATION
G4-LA9

Average hours of training per
year per employee by gender,
and by employee category

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 6

135

-

-

G4-LA10

Programs for skills
management and lifelong
learning that support the
continued employability of
employees and assist them in
managing career endings

*

135

-

-

G4-LA11

Percentage of employees
receiving regular performance
and career development
reviews, by gender and by
employee category

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 6

135

-

-

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 6

62, 133, 134

-

-

Actions taken
to implement
Principles 1,24,5

128-131, 143144

-

-

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 6

144

-

Yes/
205-207

MATERIAL ASPECT: DIVERSITY AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY

G4-LA12

Composition of governance
bodies and breakdown of
employees per employee
category according to gender,
age group, minority group
membership, and other
indicators of diversity

SUB-CATEGORY: HUMAN RIGHTS
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

MATERIAL ASPECT: NON-DISCRIMINATION
G4-HR3

Total number of incidents of
discrimination and corrective
actions taken

187

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures Material Aspects
Indicator

Description

UNGC - COP
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation
of Principles

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Page
Number

144

-

-

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 3

144

-

-

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 5

144

-

-

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 4

144

-

-

Page Number/
Explanation

MATERIAL ASPECT: FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION AND COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

G4-HR4

Operations and suppliers
identified in which the
right to exercise freedom of
association and collective
bargaining may be violated
or at significant risk, and
measures taken to support
these rights

MATERIAL ASPECT: CHILD LABOUR

G4-HR5

Operations and suppliers
identified as having
significant risk for incidents
of child labour, and measures
taken to contribute to the
effective abolition of child
labour

MATERIAL ASPECT: FORCED OR COMPULSORY LABOR

G4-HR6

Operations and suppliers
identified as having
significant risk for incidents
of forced or compulsory
labour, and measures to
contribute to the elimination
of all forms of forced or
compulsory labour

SUB-CATEGORY: SOCIETY
MATERIAL ASPECT: LOCAL COMMUNITIES
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions to
implement
Principles 1,2

146-150, 163

-

-

G4-SO1

Percentage of operations
with implemented local
community engagement,
impact assessments, and
development programmes

Outcomes of
implementation of
Principle 1,2

148, 150-162

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-SO2

Operations with significant
actual and potential negative
impacts on local communities

Outcomes of
implementation of
Principle 1,2

150-162

-

Yes/
205-207

Actions taken to
implement Principle
10

66-67

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: ANTI-CORRUPTION
G4-DMA

188

Aspect-specific DMA

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures Material Aspects

UNGC - COP
Elements

Indicator

Description

Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation
of Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Page
Number

G4-SO3

Total number and percentage
of operations asessed for risks
related to corruption and the
significant risks identified

Outcomes of
implementation of
Principle 10

66-67

-

-

G4-SO4

Communication and training
on anti-corruption policies
and procedures

Outcomes of
implementation of
Principle 10

66-67

-

-

G4-SO5

Confirmed incidents of
corruption and actions taken

Outcomes of
implementation of
Principle 10

66-67

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: PUBLIC POLICY
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken to
implement Principle
10

145

-

-

G4-SO6

Total value of political
contributions by country and
recipient/beneficiary

Outcomes of
implementation of
Principle 10

Nil

-

-

*

173

-

Yes/
205-207

MATERIAL ASPECT: COMPLIANCE

G4-SO8

Monetary value of significant
fines and total number of
non-monetary sanctions for
non-compliance with laws
and regulations

SUB-CATEGORY: PRODUCT RESPONSIBILITY
MATERIAL ASPECT: CUSTOMER HEALTH AND SAFETY
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

*

166-167

-

G4-PR1

Percentage of significant
product and service
categories for which health
and safety impacts are
assessed for improvement

*

167-170

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-PR2

Total number of incidents
of non-compliance with
regulations and voluntary
codes concerning the
health and safety impacts of
products and services during
their life cycle, by type of
outcomes

*

173

-

-

*

171-172

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: PRODUCT AND SERVICE LABELING
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

189

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures Material Aspects

UNGC - COP
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation
of Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Page
Number

Indicator

Description

G4-PR3

Type of product and service
information required by the
organisation’s procedures
for product and service
information and labeling,
and percentage of significant
product and service
categories subject to such
information requirements

*

171-172

-

-

G4-PR4

Total number of incidents
of non-compliance with
regulations and voluntary
codes concerning product
and service information and
labeling, by type of outcomes

*

173

-

-

G4-PR5

Results of surveys measuring
customer satisfaction

*

171-173

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
G4-PR6

Sale of banned or disputed
products

*

173

-

Yes/
205-207

G4-PR7

Total number of incidents
of non-compliance with
regulations and voluntary
codes concerning marketing
communications, including
advertising, promotion,
and sponsorship, by type of
outcomes

*

173

-

Yes/
205-207

*

173

-

-

*

173

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: CUSTOMER PRIVACY
G4-PR8

Total number of substantiated
complaints regarding
breaches of customer privacy
and losses of customer data

MATERIAL ASPECT: COMPLIANCE

G4-PR9

Monetary value of significant
fines for non-compliance
with laws and regulations
concerning the provision and
use of products and services

* No direct requirement by UNGC - COP
# UNGC - COP - United Nations Global Compact - Communication of progress

190

GRI- G4
Food Processing
Sector Supplement
(FPSS)
Material Aspects DMAs and Indicators

Description

Page Number/
Explanation

Reasons for
Omissions

External
Assurance

Aspect: Procurement / Sourcing Practices - Disclosure on Management Approach (DMA)
DMA

Protecting
Natural Resources

84-87

Not applicable

DMA

Minimising
Toxicity

94-99, 108-117

Not applicable

DMA

Fair Trade

All of ITC’s trading
partnerships are
conducted in
compliance with
applicable legislations

Not applicable

DMA

Fair
Compensation
for Labour

134

Not applicable

DMA

Traceability

Not reported

Separate Board
approved policies of
ITC which address
Human Rights
beyond the Work
Place, Responsible
Sourcing and Life
Cycle Sustainability
will provide the
structure around
which efforts will
be directed for
traceability within
the supply chain
and for addressing
the sustainability
aspects therein. In
2013-14, evaluation
for traceability in the
wheat supply chain

191

Material Aspects DMAs and Indicators

Description

Page Number/
Explanation

Reasons for
Omissions

Aspect: Procurement / Sourcing Practices - Disclosure on Management Approach (DMA)
has been completed
and monitoring
of performance
based on identified
material aspects will
be implemented in a
progressive manner
DMA

Genetically Modified
Organisms (GMOs)

ITC foods business
does not use
any GMOs in
manufacturing its
products

Not applicable

DMA

Biofuels

89-90

Not applicable

In line with the
commitment made in
Sustainability Report
2013, we have
developed a Policy
on Responsible
Sourcing. The
management system
for monitoring
of suppliers’
compliance with the
policy will be rolled
out in 2014-15, and
performance data
will be reported in a
progressive manner
from 2015-16

Aspect: Procurement / Sourcing Practices - Indicators
FP1

Percentage of
purchased volume
from suppliers
compliant with
company’s sourcing
policy

Not reported

FP2

Percentage of
purchased volume
which is verified as
being in accordance
with credible,
internationally
recognised
responsible
production
standards, broken
down by standard

Not reported

Aspect: Labor / Management Relations
DMA

FP3

192

Percentage of
working time lost
due to industrial
disputes, strikes
and/or lock-outs by
country

129-130

Not applicable

133

Not applicable

External
Assurance

Material Aspects DMAs and Indicators

Description

Page Number/
Explanation

Reasons for
Omissions

168

Not applicable

166-167

Not applicable

External
Assurance

Aspect: Healthy and Affordable Food
DMA

Nature, scope and
effectiveness of any
programmes and
practices
that promote access
to healthy lifestyles;
the prevention of
chronic disease;
access to healthy,
nutritious and
affordable food; and
improved welfare for
communities in need

Aspect: Customer Health and Safety
DMA

FP5

Percentage of
production volume
manufactured in
sites certified by an
independent third
party according
to internationally
recognised food
safety management
system standards

168

Not applicable

FP6

Percentage of total
sales volume of
consumer products,
by product category,
that are lowered in
saturated fat,
trans fats, sodium
and sugars

168

In Sustainability
Report 2013, we
had stated that
snacks products
with lowered sodium
content were in
the final stages of
testing and were
expected to be
launched in 201314. Market surveys
for determining
customer preference
for such products
are still underway
and their market
release will be
determined based on
production viability.
90% by volume of
our biscuits are
transfat free and
new variants with
added fibre have

193

Material Aspects DMAs and Indicators

Description

Page Number/
Explanation

Reasons for
Omissions

Aspect: Customer Health and Safety
been launched at the
end of third quarter
2013-14
FP7

Percentage of total
sales volume of
consumer products,
by product category
sold, that contain
increased fiber,
vitamins, minerals,
phytochemicals
or functional food
additives

Partially reported
in Product
Responsibility
section in 168

In Sustainability
Report 2013, we
had committed that
Foods Business
would come out with
fortified glucose
biscuits by January
2014. However, other
Biscuit variants that
contain increased
fiber, etc., have been
launched during
end of third quarter
2013-14

All information about
ingredients and
nutrition of products
is published
on the product
packaging as per
relevant statutory
requirements

Not applicable

Aspect: Product and Service Labeling
DMA

Policies and
practices on
communication
to consumers
about ingredients
and nutritional
information beyond
legal requirements

Aspect: Animal Welfare
Not material as none of our businesses are involved in activities related to animal welfare

194

External
Assurance

Business Responsibility
Report Principles

Alignment to Business
Responsibility Report
Principles
Linking Sustainability Report 2014 to Business Responsibility Report Principles to assess compliance with Environmental,
Social and Governance (ESG) norms.
Principle

Business Responsibility Report Principles to
assess compliance with ESG norms

1

Businesses should conduct and govern
themselves with Ethics, Transparency and
Accountability

2

Businesses should provide goods and services
that are safe and contribute to sustainability
throughout their life cycle

3

Businesses should promote the well being of all
employees

4

Businesses should respect the interests of, and
be responsive towards all stakeholders, especially
those who are disadvantaged, vulnerable and
marginalised

5

Businesses should respect and promote human
rights

6

Business should respect, protect, and make
efforts to restore the environment

7

Businesses, when engaged in influencing
public and regulatory policy, should do so in a
responsible manner

8

Businesses should support inclusive growth and
equitable development

9

Businesses should engage with and provide
value to their customers and consumers in a
responsible manner

Coverage in Section of
Sustainability Report 2014
Governance Structure
Energy
Air Emissions
Water Management
Resource Conservation
Raw Materials
Supply Chain
Social Investments - Mission Sunehra Kal
Product Responsibility
Labour Practices and Decent Work
Occupational Health and Safety
Human Rights Significant Investments
Economic Performance
Stakeholder Engagement
Labour Practices and Decent Work
Human Rights Significant Investments
Social Investments - Mission Sunehra Kal
Human Rights Significant Investments
Energy
Air Emissions
Water Management
Resource Conservation
Raw Materials
Biodiversity
Social Investments - Mission Sunehra Kal
Responsible Policy Advocacy
Stakeholder Engagement
Memberships and Affiliations
Economic Performance
Social Investments - Mission Sunehra Kal
Stakeholder Engagement
Product Responsibility

195

all our stakeholders. We will actualise
stakeholder value and interest on a longterm sustainable basis.

Annexures
Policies And
Guidelines
Vision, Mission
And Core Values

ITC’S Vision
Sustain ITC’s position as one of India’s most
valuable corporations through world-class
performance, creating growing value for
the Indian economy and the Company’s
stakeholders.

ITC’S Mission
To enhance the wealth generating
capability of the enterprise in a globalising
environment, delivering superior and
sustainable stakeholder value.

ITC’S Core Values
ITC’s Core Values are aimed at developing
a customer-focussed, high-performance
organisation which creates values for all its
stakeholders.

TRUSTEESHIP
As professional managers, we are conscious
that ITC has been given to us in ‘trust’ by

196

CUSTOMER FOCUS
We are always customer-focussed and will
deliver what the customer needs in terms of
value, quality and satisfaction.

RESPECT FOR PEOPLE
We are result oriented, setting high
performance standards for ourselves
as individuals and teams. We will
simultaneously respect and value people
and uphold humanness and human dignity.
We acknowledge that every individual brings
different perspectives and capabilities to the
team and that a strong team is founded on a
variety of perspectives.
We want individuals to dream, value
differences, create and experiment in pursuit
of opportunities and achieve leadership
through teamwork.

EXCELLENCE
We do what is right, do it well and win. We
will strive for excellence in whatever we do.

INNOVATION
We will constantly pursue newer and
better processes, products, services and
management practices.

NATION ORIENTATION
We are aware of our responsibility to generate
economic value for the Nation. In pursuit
of our goals, we will make no compromise
in complying with applicable laws and
regulations at all levels.

Corporate
Governance Policy
ITC defines Corporate Governance as a
systemic process by which companies are
directed and controlled to enhance their
wealth-generating capacity. Since large

corporations employ a vast quantum of
societal resources, ITC believes that the
governance process should ensure that
these resources are utilised in a manner that
meets stakeholders’ aspirations and societal
expectations. This belief is reflected in the
Company’s deep commitment to contribute
to the ‘Triple Bottom Line’, namely, the
development, nurture and regeneration of the
nation’s economic, social and environmental
capital.
ITC’s Corporate Governance structure,
systems and processes are based on two
core principles Management must have the executive
freedom to drive the enterprise forward
without undue restraints; and
This freedom of management should be
exercised within a framework of effective
accountability.
ITC believes that any meaningful policy on
Corporate Governance must empower the
executive management of the Company. At
the same time, Governance must create a
mechanism of checks and balances to ensure
that the decision-making powers vested in
the executive management are used with
care and responsibility to meet stakeholders’
aspirations and societal expectations.
From this definition and core principles
of Corporate Governance emerge the
cornerstones of ITC’s governance philosophy,
namely,
trusteeship,
transparency,
empowerment & accountability, control and
ethical corporate citizenship. ITC believes
that the practice of each of these creates the
right corporate culture that fulfills the true
purpose of Corporate Governance.
The Policy Document that sets out the
structure, policies and practices of
governance is available on the Company’s
corporate website www.itcportal.com under
the section ‘Our Values’.

senior management and employees of the
Company. This Code is derived from three
interlinked fundamental principles, viz.
good corporate governance, good corporate
citizenship and exemplary personal conduct.
The Code covers ITC’s commitment to
sustainable development, concern for
occupational health, safety and environment,
a gender friendly workplace, transparency
and auditability, legal compliance, and the
philosophy of leading by personal example.
The ITC Code of Conduct, as adopted by the
Board of Directors, is applicable to Directors,
senior management and employees of the
Company. This Code is derived from three
interlinked fundamental principles, viz.
good corporate governance, good corporate
citizenship and exemplary personal conduct.
The Code covers ITC’s commitment to
sustainable development, concern for
occupational health, safety and environment,
a gender friendly workplace, transparency
and auditability, legal compliance, and the
philosophy of leading by personal example.
ITC’s code of conduct and the Whistleblower
Policy are available on the Company’s official
website – www.itcportal.com

ITC’s Sustainability
Policies
Based on the structured stakeholder
engagements during the year, the
Sustainability and CSR Policies of the
Company were revisited to enable prioritised
consideration of the economic, environmental
and social impacts that are important to the
organisation as well as its stakeholders.
These Board-approved policies listed below
are now available on the Company’s website
– www.itcportal.com
Policy on Life-cycle Sustainability
Policy on Stakeholder Engagement
Policy on Responsible Advocacy

ITC Code of
Conduct
The ITC Code of Conduct, as adopted by the
Board of Directors, is applicable to Directors,

Policy on Product Responsibility Policy on
Responsible Sourcing
Policy on Freedom of Association
Policy on Diversity and Equal Opportunity

197

Policy on Prohibition of Child Labour
and Prevention of Forced Labour at the
Workplace
Policy on Human Rights consideration of
Stakeholders beyond the Workplace
Policy on Environment, Health & Safety

Corporate Social
Responsibility
(CSR) Policy
1. PHILOSOPHY
Recognizing that business enterprises are
economic organs of society and draw on
societal resources, it is ITC’s belief that a
company’s performance must be measured by
its Triple Bottom Line contribution to building
economic, social and environmental capital
towards enhancing societal sustainability.
ITC believes that in the strategic context of
business, enterprises possess, beyond mere
financial resources, the transformational
capacity
to
create
game-changing
development models by unleashing their
power of entrepreneurial vitality, innovation
and creativity. In line with this belief, ITC will
continue crafting unique models to generate
livelihoods and environmental capital. Such
Corporate Social Responsibility (“CSR”)
projects are far more replicable, scalable
and sustainable, with a significant multiplier
impact on sustainable livelihood creation
and environmental replenishment. These
initiatives are independent of the normal
conduct of ITC’s business. Programmes,
projects and activities (collectively “CSR
Programmes”) carried out in this regard are
the subject matter of this Policy.

2. POLICY
It is ITC’s policy:
A. To direct ITC’s CSR Programmes, inter
alia, towards achieving one or more of
the following - enhancing environmental
and natural capital; supporting rural
development;
promoting
education;
promoting healthcare, providing sanitation

198

and drinking water; creating livelihoods for
people, especially those from disadvantaged
sections of society, in rural and urban India;
preserving and promoting traditional art and
culture, and promoting sports
B. To develop the required capability and selfreliance of beneficiaries at the grass roots,
especially of women, in the belief that these
are prerequisites for social and economic
development
C. To engage in affirmative action
interventions such as skill building and
vocational training, to enhance employability
and generate livelihoods for persons from
disadvantaged sections of society
D. To pursue CSR Programmes primarily in
areas that fall within the economic vicinity
of the Company’s operations to enable
close supervision and ensure maximum
development impact
E. To carry out CSR Programmes in relevant
local areas to fulfill commitments arising
from requests by government / regulatory
authorities and to earmark amounts
of monies towards “Enterprise Social
Responsibility (ESR)” activities and to spend
such monies through ESR / CSR Cells of such
administrative bodies of the government and/
or directly by way of developmental works in
the local areas around which the Company
operates
F. To provide equal opportunities to
beneficiaries of the Company’s CSR
Programmes as vendors or employees on merit
G. To promote sustainability in partnership
with industry associations, like the
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)
through the CII-ITC Centre of Excellence for
Sustainable Development, in order to have a
multiplier impact

3. IMPLEMENTATION
To implement the Company’s CSR
Programmes through Company personnel
or through external implementing agencies
or through ITC Education Trust, ITC Rural
Development Trust, ITC Sangeet Research
Academy, ITC Bhadrachalam Education Trust,
Tribeni Tissues Education Society (and other
Trusts, Foundations and Section 8 companies

that may be established by the Company from
time to time). In such cases, the Company
will specify the CSR Programmes which may
be undertaken by those Trusts in accordance
with their Objects and administrative and
accounting processes laid down in the
respective Trust Deeds / Memoranda and
Articles of Association.

4. GOVERNANCE
A. Every year, the CSR and Sustainability
Committee will place for the Board’s approval,
a CSR Plan delineating the CSR Programmes
to be carried out during the financial year and
the specified budgets thereof. The Board will
consider and approve the CSR Plan with any
modification that may be deemed necessary
B. The Corporate Management Committee
(CMC) will assign the task of implementation
of the CSR Plan within specified budgets and
timeframes to such persons or bodies as it
may deem fit
C. The persons/bodies to which the
implementation is assigned will carry out
such CSR Programmes as determined by
the CMC within the specified budgets and
timeframes and report back to the CMC on
the progress thereon at such frequency as
the CMC may direct
D. The CMC shall review the implementation
of the CSR Programmes once a quarter and
issue necessary directions from time to time
to ensure orderly and efficient execution of the
CSR Programmes in accordance with this Policy
E. Once every six months the CMC will
provide a status update to the CSR and
Sustainability Committee on the progress
of implementation of the approved CSR
Programmes carried out during the six month
period. It shall be the responsibility of the
CSR and Sustainability Committee to review
such reports and keep the Board apprised of
the status of implementation of the same

Company on CSR Programmes undertaken
in accordance with the approved CSR Plan.
Moreover, any surplus arising from any
CSR Programmes shall be used for CSR.
Accordingly, any income arising from CSR
Programmes will be netted off from the CSR
expenditure and such net amount will be
reported as CSR expenditure.

ITC Food Products
Policy
It is ITC’s policy that its food products should
provide nutritious, tasty, hygienic and
convenient options to the consuming public.
ITC will offer food products across multiple
categories, price points, delivery formats
and segments as dictated by the needs of the
consumer.
ITC’s portfolio of food products will be
continuously improved and modified to offer new products that meet the aspiration
of the changing consumer
offer food products with affordable and
appropriate nutrition
offer food products with micronutrient
fortification
drive reduction of sodium, sugar and fat in
Products
offer trans-fat free products
offer functional food products with focus on
India specific metabolic disorders
follow a strict code for making product
functional claims
follow the highest standards in follow
responsible marketing and consumer
communications practices

F. At the end of every financial year, the CSR
and Sustainability Committee will submit its
report to the Board

create and sustain R&D  focus in
development of new products and processes

5. CSR EXPENDITURE

follow the highest standards of hygiene
and manufacturing practices in all delivery
formats

CSR expenditure will include all expenditure,
direct and indirect, incurred by the

collaborate with experts and institutions

199

ensure widespread accessibility to healthy
products through appropriate pricing and
wide distribution

POLICY FRAMEWORK AND
STRATEGIES
As with all laws, ITC’s Food products
will adhere to all legal and regulatory
requirements as prescribed from time to time.
To offer new products that meet the
aspiration of the changing consumer.
As the aspiration of the consumer changes,
new products will be developed and
launched to meet the taste, nutrition
and convenience expectations of future
consumers.
To offer products with affordable and
appropriate nutrition.
Recommendations of the National Institute
of Nutrition (NIN), India, will be referred
to, to assess nutritional appropriateness
of ITC’s food products. Efforts will be made
to offer products with appropriate nutrient
density for mass consumption, including
catering to the needs of those sections
of the society who are economically
disadvantaged.
To offer products with micro-nutrient
fortification.
ITC’s food products will be suitably fortified
with micro-nutrients (iron, calcium, zinc,
iodine, folic acid, other vitamins and
minerals) wherever feasible. ITC’s R&D will
continue to carry out suitable research
programmes to make fortified nutrients
more biologically available and functional.
To drive reduction of sodium, sugar and fat
in products
ITC’s R&D will endeavour to find solutions
aimed at reducing fat, sugar and sodium
(“FSS”) in food products, without impacting
the taste profile of the product. In addition
to scientific solutions, ITC will also adopt the
Adaptation Methodology to reduce these
ingredients in a gradual manner. Guidelines
will be made and tangible targets will be
set for the new product development teams
to reduce the above ingredients in the new

200

products. ITC will endeavour to introduce
such Reduced FSS products in the market
by year 2013.
To offer Trans Fat Free Products
To disclose added trans-fats, if any, in all
food products. To work towards not using
any hydrogenated oil in all food products by
the year 2015.
To offer functional food products with focus
on India-specific metabolic disorders
ITC, with well-researched functional
ingredients, will endeavour to make
functional food products suitable for
consumption by Indians who suffer from
metabolic disorders. ITC will release such
functional products to the consumer, only
after fully understanding the mechanism
of action of the functional ingredients at
the molecular level. Integrative biology
approaches will be employed to study these
ingredients’ efficacy.
To follow a strict code for making product
functional claims
ITC will conduct clinical trials in India by
using Indian subjects to study the efficacy
of its functional foods. Experts’ opinion
will be taken to design the clinical studies
and suitable statistical methods will be
employed to interpret the clinical study
data. Indian Council of Medical Research
(ICMR) guidelines will be referred to and
followed in all clinical studies. Functional
claims will be made only after statistical
significance is observed.
To follow the highest standards in nutrition
labelling and reporting
ITC’s packaged food products’ labelling will
be comprehensive with good clarity on the
contents of all macro and micro-nutrients.
The nutrient content will be compared with
the NIN recommended Daily Value (DV)
and the percentage in the product will be
reported.
To follow responsible marketing and
consumer communication practices
Apart from complying with all local laws
and regulations, advertisements of ITC’s
food products will also adhere to the ASCI

Code. All product communication to the
consumer will appropriately represent
the products. Internal audits will be done
on marketing practices and, if needed,
corrective action will be taken. Efforts will
be made to promote nutritious foods and
educate the rural consumer in food hygiene.
To create and sustain R&D focus in
development of new products and processes

national geographic distribution across
both urban and rural centres, using its
FMCG distribution infrastructure and
its e-choupal related rural distribution
reach. ITC will also ensure accessibility
across demographics through adopting a
portfolio approach across all relevant price
segments.

ITC’s R&D organisation is structured to
research exploratory subjects and applied
research subjects. ITC’s R&D infrastructure
is of international standards, and has been
certified with ISO 14001-2004 for EHS and
ISO 17025 NABL for analytical processes.
There are more than 100 scientists
conducting R&D on several food related
platforms. ITC will continuously strive to
contemporise its R&D infrastructure to
meet changing nutrition needs.
To follow the highest standards of hygiene
and manufacturing practices in all delivery
formats
ITC Hotels R&D endeavours to practice
GHP & GMP (Good Hygiene Practices &
Good Manufacturing Practices) along
with ISO 22000 food safety management
system implementation with PAS 220
relevant applications. ITC hotels will
stringently follow all applicable regulatory
requirements, with particular focus on risk
minimisation and elimination.
To collaborate with experts and institutions
ITC believes in collaborating with outside
experts to upgrade the knowledge of
its personnel with a view to guiding the
foods business in developing products
with balanced nutrition and functional
ingredients. ITC will continue to collaborate
with national and international institutions
for scientific research and specific projects.
ITC believes in using an Open Innovation
policy in developing its R&D for food
products.
To ensure widespread accessibility of
healthy products through pricing and
distribution
ITC will ensure the widest accessibility to
its healthy food products through ensuring

201

Road – Emission factors for trucks are
calculated based on the Report by World
Bank on Road Transport Service Efficiency
Study (India) – 2005.

Annexure

GHG Inventory:
Quantification
Methodologies

Rail – Emission factors are calculated based
on the information available from the Indian
Railways Annual report 2011-12, Indian
Railways Statistics 2011-12.
Air/Ship
–
latest
“Guidelines
to
DEFRA / DECC’s GHG Conversion Factors for
Company Reporting - Freight Transport 2011”
developed by the Department of Energy and
Climate Change (DECC) and the Department
for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
(DEFRA), U.K.

4. GHG REMOVALS
GHG removals from plantations have
been calculated based on the approved
methodology used in ITC’s UNFCCC
registered CDM project ‘2241: Reforestation
of severely degraded landmass in Khammam
District of Andhra Pradesh, India under ITC
Social Forestry Project.’

1. STATIONARY COMBUSTION
Emission factors provided in the IPCC
Guideline for National Greenhouse Gas
Inventories of 2006 were used to calculate
GHG emissions from stationary combustion
sources. Activity data (quantity of fuel
consumed) is multiplied with the respective
default energy factor or actual measured Net
Calorific Value (NCVs) and emission factor to
quantify the direct emission from stationary
combustion sources.

2. PURCHASED ELECTRICITY
The quantification of energy indirect GHG
emission is based on activity data (Purchased
Electricity in kWh) multiplied by emission
factors specified in the ‘CO2 Baseline
Database for the Indian Power Sector User
Guide’, (version 9.0, January 2014) issued by
Central Electricity Authority, Government of
India.

3. TRANSPORTATION
The modes of transportation, used in ITC, for
raw materials, finished goods & wastes, and
sources for calculation of emission factors
are as follows:
202

The quantification of GHG emissions from
minor sources is based on a robust process
of data collection at Unit/Division level and
emission factors taken from recognised
global sources, such as IPCC guidelines and
assessment reports; GHG Protocol HFC Tool
v1.0 developed by GHG Protocol initiative,
WRI & WBCSD; Pulp and Paper Tool-2005;
UNFCCC approved methodologies. The
sources that have a minor contribution to
ITC’s overall GHG emissions are listed below:
1.	 Air-conditioning
2.	 Process Emissions
3.	 Company owned vehicles	
4.	 SF6 release from power distribution 	
system
5.	 CO2 release from fire protection system
6.	 Gas cutting/ welding
7.	 Waste water treatment
8.	 GHG emissions from composting of waste
inside the unit premises
9.	 GHG emissions from fertiliser 		
application in forestry project
10.	Guest travel related to our Hotels business

MEMBERSHIPS &
AFFILIATIONS – 2014

MEMBERSHIPS &
AFFILIATIONS – 2014
 gricultural & Processed Foods Export
A
Development Authority
All India Food Processors Association
All India Management Association
Andhra Chamber of Commerce

Confederation of Indian Industry
Ecotourism Society of India
Employers’ Association of Northern India
Export Inspection Council of India

Asian Packaging Federation

 ederation of Andhra Pradesh Chambers of
F
Commerce and Industry

 ssociated Chambers of Commerce &
A
Industry

 ederation of Biscuits Manufacturers
F
Association of India

 ssociated Chambers of Commerce and
A
Industry of Uttar Pradesh

 ederation of Hotels & Restaurants
F
Association of India

 angalore Chamber of Industry and
B
Commerce

Federation of Indian Export Organisations

Bangalore Management Association
Bihar Chamber of Commerce
Bihar Industries Association
Bihar State Productivity Council
 ombay Chamber of Commerce and
B
Industry
Bombay Management Association
Bureau of Indian Standards
 entral Food Technology Research
C
Institute
 entral Institute of Plastics Engineering &
C
Technology
 hemicals & Plastics Export Council of
C
India

 ederation of Indian Chambers of
F
Commerce and Industry
 ederation of Industries and Commerce of
F
North Eastern Region
 ederation of Jharkhand Chambers of
F
Commerce & Industry
 ederation of Karnataka Chambers of
F
Commerce & Industry
Gujarat Chamber of Commerce & Industry
Guwahati Management Association
Hotel Association of India
I nternational Market Assessment India
Limited
Indian Association of Tour Operators
Indian Beauty and Hygiene Association

Coal Consumers Association

Indian Chamber of Commerce, Calcutta

Cochin Chamber of Commerce & Industry

I ndian Chamber of Commerce and Industry,
Coimbatore

Coffee Board
Coffee Exporters Association

Indian Coffee Trade Association
India Convention Promotion Bureau

203

Indian Green Building Council

Paper Film and Foil Converters Association

Indian Institute of Packaging

PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry

Indian Merchants’ Chamber

 rotein Food and Nutrition Development
P
Association of India

Indian Paper Manufacturers Association
I ndian Printing Packaging and Allied
Machinery Manufacturers Association

Retailers Association of India

Indian Pulp & Paper Technical Association

Seafood Exporters Association of India

Indian Tobacco Association

Society for Urban Regeneration of Gurgaon

Indian Wind Power Association

Solvent Extractors Association of India

Indo American Chamber of Commerce

Soyabean Processors Association of India

Indo German Chamber of Commerce

T amil Nadu Electricity Consumers
Association

Industrial Waste Management Association
Institute of Directors
International Chamber of Commerce
International Flexible Packaging Network

The All India Association of Industries
T he Bengal Chamber of Commerce &
Industry

International Life Science Institute

T he Central Organisation for Oil Industry
and Trade

International Packaging Group

The Energy and Research Institute

Karnataka Planters Association

T he Food Safety and Standards Authority
of India

Leatherhead Food International, UK
Madras Chamber of Commerce & Industry
Madras Management Association
 adras Printers and Lithographers
M
Association
 aharashtra Economic Development
M
Council
 ahratta Chamber of Commerce, Industry
M
& Agriculture
 arine Products Export Development
M
Authority

The Indian Chamber of Commerce, Guntur
The Indian Society of Advertisers
T he United Planters’ Association of
Southern India
T he Utkal Chamber of Commerce &
Industry
T he Visakhapatnam Chamber of Commerce
& Industry
Travel Agents Association of India
United States Tour Operators Association

Multi Commodity Exchange of India Limited

US Food and Drug Administration

 ational Commodity & Derivatives
N
Exchange Limited

 estern UP Chamber of Commerce &
W
Industry

 ational Council of Applied Economic
N
Research

 orld Travel & Tourism Council India
W
Initiative

National Safety Council

 orld Wide Fund - Global Forest and Trade
W
Network

Oil Technologists’ Association of India
Pacific Asia Travel Association

204

Ranjangaon Industries Association

 orld Business Council for Sustainable
W
Development

INDEPENDENT
ASSURANCE STATEMENT

205

206

INDEPENDENT
ASSURANCE STATEMENT

207

208

INDEPENDENT
ASSURANCE STATEMENT

209

210

ITC’s Sustainability Report can be
downloaded from www.itcportal.com

ITC’s Sustainability app can be downloaded from
http://www.itcportal.com/app/sustainability.aspx

Follow ITC on
Twitter @ITCCorpCom

Figures in this section are as on May 2014

