SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2016
ITC LIMITED

SUSTAINABLE
LIVELIHOODS

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS
GRI - G4 COMPLIANT: IN ACCORDANCE - COMPREHENSIVE

ITC’s Sustainability Report can be downloaded
from ITC’s corporate website, www.itcportal.com

ITC’s Sustainability app can be downloaded from
http://www.itcportal.com/app/itc-apps.aspx

Follow ITC on Twitter @ITCCorpCom

ITC Limited is a GRI Gold Community member
and supports GRI’s mission to provide widely used
standards on sustainability reporting.

Contents
04
10

122

Chairman’s Statement
Organisational Profile

Supply Chain

22

Certifications, Honours and Awards 26

30

Stakeholder Engagement,
Risks & Opportunities
and Materiality Analysis

46

Report Profile, Scope
and Boundary

52
60

Governance Structure

Labour Practices &
Decent Work and
Human Rights

124

Occupational Health
and Safety

132

ITC’s Mission Sunehra 138
Kal for Sustainable &
Inclusive Growth
Product Responsibility 160

168

GRI Index

186

GRI-G4 Food
Processing Sector
Supplement (FPSS)

188

Alignment to BRR
Principles

189

Annexures

Category: Economic

Management Approach

62

Economic Performance

63

72

Category: Social

Category: Environment

Management Approach

74

Energy

76

Air Emissions

84

Water Management

94

Waste Management

104

Raw Materials

114

Biodiversity

118

Policies and Guidelines

189

Quantification Methodology:
Energy and GHG Emissions

190

Memberships and Affiliations

191

193

Independent Assurance
Statements
01

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Triple Bottom Line
Performance
ITC: Creating 6 Million
Sustainable Livelihoods

Over the last twenty years:
Revenue has grown tenfold
Profit Before Tax has grown
33 times
Total Shareholder Returns has
grown at a compound annual
rate of 23.3%

Environment
Carbon Positive:
11 consecutive years

Water Positive:
14 years in a row

Economic
ITC has created multiple
drivers of growth by
developing a portfolio
of world-class Indian
businesses
Diversified multi-business
conglomerate spanning
FMCG, Hotels, Paperboards &
Packaging, Agri Business and
Information Technology
Vibrant portfolio of world-class
Indian brands
Market capitalisation: $44 billion

02

Solid Waste Recycling Positive:
For the last 9 years

Soil & Moisture conservation
covering nearly 2,70,000 hectares
ITC’s Watershed Development Programme
is designed to assist farmers in identified
moisture-stressed areas.

Increasing Renewable Energy
Portfolio
Over 47% (last year – 43%) of ITC’s total
energy requirements was met from
carbon neutral sources such as biomass,
wind and solar.

Greenest Luxury Hotel Chain

Turnover: Nearly $8 billion

All ITC’s premium luxury Hotels are LEED®
Platinum certified.

ITC Group provides direct
employment to more than
32,000 people

Over 2,25,000 hectares greened
under ITC’s Social and Farm
Forestry Programme

Triple Bottom Line Performance

Well-being Out of Waste (WOW)
The ‘Well-being Out of Waste’ initiative
currently extends to 400 municipal
wards
of
Hyderabad,
Chennai,
Bengaluru, Coimbatore and several
towns of Telangana. It inculcates
the habit of source segregation
and recycling.

Social

enterprises or assisted with loans to pursue
income generating activities.

Animal husbandry services for
over 13,00,000 milch animals
The Programme for genetic improvement
of cattle through artificial insemination
to produce high-yielding crossbred
progenies is implemented through
238 Cattle Development Centres
covering over 10,000 villages.

ITC’s Social Investments
Programme is spread over 26
states covering 166 districts

Afforestation Programme
generates over 100 million
person-days of employment

Primary Education Initiative:
Benefitting 4,70,000 children

ITC’s Biodiversity Programme now
covers nearly 4,000 hectares

During 2015-16, 45,823 children were
covered under this initiative comprising
‘Read India Plus’ programme and
176 Supplementary Learning Centres
to mainstream out-of-school children
into regular schools. Till June 2016,
the total number of children benefitted is
nearly 4,70,000.

ITC e-Choupal: Empowering
4 million farmers

The objective is to protect native
flora and fauna and providing other
ecosystem services.

ITC’s Vocational Training
Programme - Training nearly
34,000 youth
This Programme played an active role
in building and upgrading skills of
marginalised youth to better meet the
emerging needs of the job market.

ITC’s globally acknowledged e-Choupal Figures in this section are as on June 2016. Figures in the rest of the Report pertain
initiative is the world’s largest rural to the Financial year 2015-16.
digital infrastructure benefitting over
4 million farmers.

Over 50,000 sustainable
livelihoods for rural women
The Programme aims at economic
mainstreaming of rural women including
the ultra-poor by enabling them to earn
independent incomes. These women were
gainfully employed either through micro03

Chairman’s
Statement

It gives me immense pleasure
to present the 13th Sustainability Report of ITC.
This Report, as in earlier years, is a proactive disclosure of the Company’s Triple Bottom Line
performance and is third-party assured. Once again, the Report conforms to the highest
“In Accordance – Comprehensive” level of reporting prescribed in the G4 guidelines of the
Global Reporting Initiative (GRI).
I am also happy to reaffirm ITC’s commitment to the principles of the United Nation’s Global
Compact. The Company’s large-scale sustainability programmes are in alignment with the
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) commitments made by India to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The Company’s social investment
initiatives also make a meaningful contribution towards meeting the objectives set in the
UN Sustainable Development Goals.

A New Chapter in Global
Sustainability
In many ways, the year gone by marked the beginning of a new chapter in global sustainability.
Led by the United Nations, the world adopted the Sustainable Development Goals, a bold
new global agenda for ending poverty, fighting inequality and preserving the environment.
In April this year, 175 nations converged in Paris to sign the historic UN Climate Agreement,
pledging stringent measures to save the Earth from the disastrous consequences of global
warming. While the agreement gave rise to new hopes for the planet and future generations,
it was also clear that the world was in a race against time. A race to create sustainable
livelihoods of an unprecedented scale before millions of jobless youth became a source of
global social unrest. A race also to replenish the environment before its degradation chokes
future progress and makes the Earth a barren planet.
04

Chairman’s Statement
The UN has warned that the world would need to create at least 600 million jobs over the
next decade. This would be critical to providing livelihood opportunities to new entrants as
well as to those who have lost their jobs due to the impact of the recent economic crises. In
addition, almost a billion people would need to be moved out of abject poverty. Therefore,
the challenge today is not only to achieve higher rates of growth in a fragile global economy
but to ensure that such growth is equitable and can also create livelihood opportunities.
This is indeed a tall task.
Compounding the social challenges is the alarming pace of environmental degradation and
global warming. 2016 is slated to be the hottest year in the history of the planet. Extreme
and erratic weather events like heat waves, intense storms, rising sea levels, successive
cycles of droughts and floods, catastrophic loss of bio-diversity and top soil erosion have
triggered widespread devastation. In India, a double whammy of heat waves and droughts
have claimed thousands of lives in recent times. Experts have repeatedly warned that human
influence is damaging the environment at a rate much faster than it can ever recover.

Once again,
the Report has
achieved the
highest “In
Accordance –
Comprehensive”
level of reporting
prescribed in the
G4 guidelines
of the Global
Reporting
Initiative

India’s socio-economic context mirrors these global challenges. Undoubtedly, the country
has made remarkable progress, poised as it is to become the world’s third largest economy
in PPP terms by 2030. However, the scale and complexity of its sustainability challenges
are daunting. Nearly 300 million people, who live in multi-dimensional poverty, still need
critical support to live a life of dignity. What is of extreme concern is the fact that more than
10 million youth, who join the workforce annually, are unable to find gainful employment.

05

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

There is today growing realisation worldwide that such unemployed youth are extremely
vulnerable, prone to be radicalised and drawn into criminal and violent activity. Unstable
societies cannot foster sustainable economic growth. They negate society’s advancements
and mire the world in conflict and uncertainty.
Going forward, India will face larger challenges to ensure food, nutrition, water, energy,
education and health security for the 1.5 billion people who are likely to inhabit the country
by 2030. Already, environmental resources are under huge stress given the fact that with
17% of the world’s population, the country has only 2.4% of world’s land, 4% of global water
resources and 1% of forest resources. The need to replenish our environmental resources on
a colossal scale has never been more critical and urgent.

The Role of Business
Any sustainable solution to such monumental challenges requires the concerted
efforts of all sections of society — government, business and members of the civil society.
Businesses can indeed play a very meaningful role. With their diverse managerial capability,
superior innovative capacity and entrepreneurial vitality, corporates can bring about
transformational change in society through productive utilisation of scarce societal
resources. The entrepreneurial capability that businesses employ to create winning
products and services can be channelled to create larger societal value, enabling a
multiplier contribution to sustainable and inclusive growth.
I believe that these transformative energies of business can be unleashed when corporates
redefine their value proposition by focusing on a larger purpose to contribute to societal
value creation rather than shareholder value alone. It is this belief that helped ITC shape
its Vision & Strategy in building a sustainable enterprise of tomorrow.

ITC’s Sustainability
Vision & Strategy
ITC has over
the years
designed and
implemented
large-scale
programmes
to replenish
and enrich the
environment,
create
sustainable
livelihoods,
empower local
communities
and address the
challenges of
climate change

06

Two decades ago when I assumed office as Chairman, we articulated a superordinate Vision
to transform the Company into a vibrant engine of growth for the Indian economy by not
only repositioning the organisation for extreme competitiveness but also by making societal
value creation a core purpose of business. We embarked on a mission to create an exemplary
Indian enterprise that would live by its credo of putting Country before Corporation and
Institution before the Individual.
This mission to serve larger national priorities spurred innovative strategies that
orchestrated a symphony of efforts to address some of the most challenging issues
facing Indian society — widespread poverty and income inequities on the one hand; and
environmental degradation and the impact of climate change on the other. Leveraging the
Company’s enterprise strengths and its large presence in rural communities, ITC has over
the years designed and implemented large-scale programmes to replenish and enrich the
environment, create sustainable livelihoods, empower local communities and address the
challenges of climate change. These programmes are encapsulated in the various chapters
of this Report.
It is a matter of great satisfaction for all our stakeholders that the Company is today
acknowledged as an exemplar in Triple Bottom Line performance. The choice of sustainable
strategy and practices have enabled the Company’s businesses and value-chains to generate
sustainable livelihoods for around 6 million people. ITC is today the only Company in the

Chairman’s Statement
world of comparable dimensions to be carbon positive for 11 years, water positive for 14
years and solid waste recycling positive for the last 9 years.

Integrated Approach
to Sustainability
Embedding sustainability in the Company’s DNA requires an integrated approach to ensure
impactful outcomes. The abiding Vision to serve a larger national purpose continues to
provide the inspiration for every thought and action. Innovative strategies have leveraged
the Company’s core capabilities to address critical societal challenges identified through
extensive stakeholder engagement. As a result of these ground-up efforts, effective
programmes have been designed and implemented in close collaboration with local
communities ensuring more meaningful outcomes.
Poverty and environmental degradation are inextricably linked, requiring comprehensive
interventions that are also adaptive to the local environment and context. Often, such
societal challenges are addressed in isolation or in silos leading to sub-optimal solutions.
ITC’s efforts to align national priorities, needs of local communities and high-impact
initiatives result in more sustainable and scalable solutions. This mosaic of comprehensive
solutions includes the globally acknowledged ITC e-Choupal initiative, large scale
afforestation and watershed programmes, animal husbandry and livestock development
initiatives, primary education, vocational training, women’s empowerment as well as health
and sanitation programmes. These together make a meaningful contribution to improving
the quality of life of people in rural India whilst also enriching the natural resource base.
In addition, as an environment steward, ITC strives to lower its carbon footprint at
all its operations through Greenhouse Gas Reduction programmes, efforts in renewable
energy, construction of green buildings and interventions to reduce specific energy and
water consumption.

Embedding
sustainability in
the Company’s
DNA requires
an integrated
approach to
ensure impactful
outcomes. The
abiding Vision
to serve a larger
national purpose
continues to
provide the
inspiration for
every thought
and action.
Innovative
strategies have
leveraged the
Company’s core
capabilities
to address
critical societal
challenges
identified
through
extensive
stakeholder
engagement

A comprehensive set of Board-approved Sustainability Policies has been adopted to guide
pro-active action for superior Triple Bottom Line performance. ITC has also adopted a
comprehensive CSR policy, outlining programmes, projects and activities that the Company
plans to undertake to create a significant positive impact on identified stakeholders. A Board
Committee on CSR and Sustainability has been in place for several years now to review,
monitor and provide strategic direction to the Company’s sustainability efforts. In addition,
the Corporate Management Committee of ITC is supported by a Sustainability Compliance
Review Committee for regular monitoring of initiatives and evaluating compliance with the
Sustainability Policies of the Company.
To bring sustainability issues to centre-stage and rally industry to embrace the larger cause
of societal value creation, ITC has joined hands with the Confederation of Indian Industry
to establish the CII-ITC Centre of Excellence for Sustainable Development as a focal point
for thought leadership, building capacity, raising awareness, information dissemination and
recognising exemplars in sustainability.

Creating Sustainable
Livelihoods
ITC’s Social Investments Programme is aimed at economic empowerment of the most
disadvantaged sections of society, especially in rural India, through grassroots capacity
building. The Company has adopted a 360 degree approach to enrich rural eco-systems,
07

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

putting in place long-term drivers that progressively contribute to the national priorities of
employment generation and inclusive growth.
To secure livelihoods for the stakeholder communities not just for today but also for the
future, ITC’s Social Investments Programme follows a two-pronged approach. On the one
hand, it seeks to make today’s dominant sources of income sustainable by empowering rural
communities to conserve and augment their social and environmental capital in order to
secure agri production systems and thereby their current sources of livelihood. On the other
hand, it aims at creating capabilities for income generation and employment for the future
by helping the communities put in place the necessary socio-economic infrastructure to
equip them to take advantage of emerging economic opportunities.
ITC also considers the Union and State Governments to be important stakeholders as they
play a vital role in helping amplify the scale of the Social Investments interventions through
public-private people partnerships. Currently, the footprint of ITC’s Social Investments
Programme is spread across 26 states covering 166 districts.

Environmental Stewardship
In line with the Company’s vision to pursue a low carbon strategy, ITC has adopted several
initiatives to address the adverse impacts of climate change. Its large-scale afforestation
interventions, climate-smart agriculture initiatives and watershed development programmes
are complemented by the Company’s efforts to continuously enhance energy efficiency and
conservation in its units as well as invest in cleaner and renewable energy sources. These
initiatives support the INDC commitments made by India to the UN.
A testimony to ITC’s commitment to reducing dependence on fossil fuels is the fact that
today, over 47% of the Company’s total energy requirements is met from renewable energy
sources such as biomass, wind and solar. ITC plans to scale this up to at least 50% by 2020.
ITC also continues to focus on water stewardship and has started implementing a long-term
strategy for water security for all stakeholders at identified high water stress areas.

Over 47% of
the Company’s
total energy
requirements
is met from
renewable
energy
sources. ITC
has pioneered
the movement
for ’green
buildings’ in
India. Several of
ITC’s properties
are LEED®
(Leadership
in Energy and
Environmental
Design)
certified

08

ITC has pioneered the movement for ’green buildings’ in India. Several of ITC’s properties are
LEED® (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) certified. All its premium luxury
hotels have earned the LEED® Platinum certification, making ITC Hotels the “greenest
luxury hotel chain” in the world. The ITC Grand Chola is the world’s largest LEED® Platinum
certified green hotel. The ITC Green Centre in Gurgaon is the highest rated green building in
the world. The ITC Sankhya Data Centre in Bengaluru is the first such facility in the world to
receive LEED® Platinum certification. Several of ITC’s factories are LEED® certified as well.
The Company’s Solid Waste Management programme – christened ‘WOW - Well-being out of
Waste’ has provided effective solutions in several cities of South India, enjoying the support
of over 5 million citizens, 5,00,000 school children, 350 corporates, more than 1,000
commercial establishments and around 200 industrial plants. This programme addresses
the growing concern of post-consumer waste management.

Towards a New Paradigm of
Responsible Competitiveness
As a Company deeply rooted in the country’s soil, ITC has aligned its sustainability initiatives
to contribute to nation building and a secure future. The daunting challenges of social
inequities and environmental degradation require growth that needs to go far beyond
economic wealth creation alone, to embrace a much larger model of societal value creation.

Chairman’s Statement
Undoubtedly, high growth rates are necessary, but that by itself may not be sufficient to
ensure social equity or environmental replenishment. A new paradigm of growth is therefore
called for - an integrated approach that builds extreme competitiveness whilst at the same
time ensuring that the environment is nourished and not plundered, dignity of labour is
preserved and sustainable livelihoods are created along the entire value-chain. I call this
paradigm of growth “Responsible Competitiveness”, which to my mind creates the winning
enterprises of the future.
It is my belief that enduring and responsible competitiveness of a Nation is strengthened by
its ownership of intellectual capital that creates, captures and retains larger value for the
country. Ownership of intellectual property is manifest in brands that serve as a perpetual
source of value for the enterprise as well as the country they belong to. It is for this reason
that ITC has invested in creating world-class Indian brands, several of which are market
leaders in their categories. These brands also anchor sustainable value-chains that empower
some of the weakest in rural India. In addition, ITC has significantly enriched and enlarged
its R&D capabilities with the establishment of the ITC Life Sciences and Technology Centre
in Bengaluru. This Centre is driving the Company’s agenda of creating intellectual capital for
the nation with nearly 350 world-class scientists. In a short span of time, over 480 patent
applications have been filed. This effort is expected to accelerate in the coming years. The
Company is also investing in physical infrastructure assets to contribute to the country’s
competitive capacity. Currently, 65 projects are under implementation or in an advanced
stage of planning. These together enlarge ITC’s capacity to contribute to national priorities
and create sustainable livelihoods and environmental enrichment on a much larger scale.

ITC Life Sciences
and Technology
Centre is driving
the Company’s
agenda of
creating
intellectual
capital for the
nation with
nearly 350
world-class
scientists. In
a short span
of time, over
480 patent
applications
have been filed

This journey has indeed been fulfilling, and the scale achieved immensely encouraging,
though we recognise that there are miles to go. Yet, our success emboldens us to say that
collectively, business and industry can indeed bring transformational change by pursuing
a path towards Responsible Competitiveness. A paradigm shift will take place only when
consumers, investors and civil society make an enlightened choice in favour of products
and services by sustainable companies. This will unleash strong market drivers to support
corporates that innovate to deliver larger sustainable and inclusive value. Preferential
government policy and incentives in favour of such companies will lend even further support
to multiply the efforts of such sustainability champions.
It is with great pleasure that I dedicate this Report to our stakeholders, who have supported
and encouraged us in this eventful journey. Indeed, these efforts would be worthwhile and
fulfilling, if we bequeath a better and secure world for the generations to come.

Y C Deveshwar
Chairman, ITC Limited

09

Organisational
Profile

10

Organisational Profile

ITC’s Businesses
FMCG

Hotels

Paperboards,
Paper & Packaging

Agri Business

Information
Technology

11

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Creating Enduring Value
ITC Limited is one of India’s most valuable and admired corporations. Inspired by an abiding vision to sub-serve larger
national priorities, ITC has pursued innovative strategies to synergise the creation of long-term shareholder value
with the continuous enhancement of societal and environmental capital.

12

Creating Multiple Drivers
of Growth

Creating World-Class Brands that
Capture Value for India

With a turnover of nearly $8 billion and a market
capitalisation of $40 billion, ITC’s aspiration
to create enduring value for the Nation and
its stakeholders is manifest in its robust and
diversified portfolio of traditional and greenfield
businesses. The competitiveness of ITC’s diverse
Businesses rest on the strong foundations of
institutional strengths derived from its deep
consumer insights, cutting-edge Research &
Development, differentiated product development
capacity, brand-building capability, world-class
manufacturing infrastructure, extensive rural
linkages, efficient trade marketing and distribution
network and dedicated human resources. ITC’s
ability to leverage internal synergies residing across
its diverse Businesses lends a unique source of
competitive advantage to its products and services.
Today, ITC is the country’s leading FMCG marketer,
the clear market leader in the Indian Paperboard and
Packaging industry, a globally acknowledged pioneer
in farmer empowerment through its wide-reaching
Agri Business, the second largest Hotel Chain in
India and a trailblazer in ‘green hoteliering’. ITC
Infotech, a wholly-owned subsidiary is a specialised
global full service provider, led by Business and
Technology Consulting. This portfolio of rapidly
growing Businesses considerably enhances ITC’s
capacity to generate growing value for the country.

ITC believes that it is of paramount importance to
build and nurture world-class Indian brands, which
help create, capture and retain larger value for the
Indian economy, in addition to generating sustainable
livelihoods. A successful brand is a badge of honour
for the country it belongs to, and a sustained source
of wealth creation. Leveraging the Company’s core
competencies, institutional strengths and internal
synergies, the new FMCG Businesses comprising
Branded Packaged Foods, Personal Care Products,
Lifestyle Retailing, Education & Stationery Products
and Matches and Agarbattis have gained significant
market standing over the years. Within a relatively
short span of time, ITC has established vital brands,
many of which are today market leaders in their
segments, or have garnered a significant share
of consumer franchise. ITC’s bouquet of brands
includes ‘Aashirvaad’, ‘Aashirvaad Svasti’, ‘Sunfeast
Dark Fantasy’, ‘Sunfeast Dream Cream’, ‘Sunfeast
Delishus’, ‘Sunfeast Mom’s Magic’, ‘Sunfeast
Yumfills’, ‘Sunfeast Bounce’, ‘Bingo!’, ‘Yumitos’,
‘YiPPee!’, ‘Candyman’, ‘mint-o’, ‘B Natural’, ‘GumOn’
and ‘Kitchens of India’ in the Branded Packaged
Foods space; ‘Classmate’ and ‘Paperkraft’ in
Education & Stationery products market; ‘Essenza Di
Wills’, ‘Fiama Di Wills’, ‘Engage’, ‘Savlon’, ‘Shower
to Shower’, ‘Vivel’ and ‘Superia’ in the Personal Care
products segment; ‘Wills Lifestyle’ and ‘John Players’
in the Lifestyle Retailing Business; ‘Mangaldeep’ in
Agarbattis and ‘Aim’ in Matches, amongst others.

Organisational Profile

Building Natural
and Social Capital
ITC’s vision of sustainable and inclusive growth has
led to the adoption of a Triple Bottom Line approach
that simultaneously builds economic, social and
environmental capital. Its Social Investment
Programmes, including Social Forestry, Soil & Moisture
Conservation, Sustainable Agriculture, Livestock
Development, Biodiversity, Women Empowerment,
Education, Skilling & Vocational Training and
Health & Sanitation, have had a transformational
impact on rural India. These Programmes strive to
empower stakeholder communities to conserve,
manage and augment their natural resources, create
sustainable on and off-farm livelihood sources and
improve social infrastructure in rural areas. Through
its Businesses and associated value chains, ITC
has supported the generation of around 6 million
livelihoods, touching the lives of many living at the
margins in rural India. In line with its commitment
to environmental goals, ITC has constantly strived
to reduce the impact of its Businesses, processes,
products and services and create a positive footprint.
ITC has adopted a low-carbon growth strategy
through reduction in specific energy consumption
and enhancing use of renewable energy sources.
At the same time it seeks to enlarge its positive
footprint through increased carbon sequestration
by expanding forestry projects in wastelands. Over
47% of the total energy requirement of the Company
is today met from renewable sources, a testimony
to its commitment to a low carbon growth path.
This is indeed a remarkable performance, given the
large manufacturing base of the Company. ITC also
endeavours to reduce specific water consumption
and augment rainwater harvesting activities both
on site and off site at watershed catchment areas, as
well as minimise waste generation, maximise reuse
& recycling and use external post-consumer waste as
raw material in its units.

Achievements
ITC has received national and global recognition
for its multi-faceted achievements. It has been
ranked as ‘India’s Most Admired Company’ in a
survey conducted by Fortune India magazine and
Hay Group. ITC has also been rated as the world’s 8th
largest ‘sustainable value creator’ among consumer
goods companies globally, according to a report by
the Boston Consulting Group (BCG). As a testimony
to its exemplary Triple Bottom Line performance,
ITC has also been presented the World Business
and Development Award at the historic Rio+20 UN
Summit for its Social and Farm Forestry initiative.
ITC Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar has been ranked the
7th Best Performing CEO in the world by the Harvard
Business Review in its January-February edition of
2013. Mr Deveshwar has also been conferred the
Padma Bhushan, one of the country’s highest civilian
honours, for his leadership in transforming ITC into
an organisation with a deep commitment to national
priorities of sustainable and inclusive growth.

13

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

ITC’s Businesses
Fast Moving Consumer Goods
ITC straddles a range of Businesses within the FMCG segment, including Branded
Packaged Foods, Personal Care Products, Cigarettes, Lifestyle Retailing, Education and
Stationery Products, and Safety Matches and Incense Sticks (Agarbattis). Keeping pace
with the rapid growth of the FMCG industry in India, ITC has significantly scaled up its
presence in this segment.

14

Organisational Profile

Branded Packaged Foods
ITC’s Branded Packaged Foods Business is one of the fastest growing foods businesses in
India. A spread of delectable offerings in Staples, Snacks & Meals, Confections and Beverages
is available under the popular brands - ‘Aashirvaad’, ‘Sunfeast’, ‘Bingo!’, ‘YiPPee!’, ‘Kitchens
of India’, ‘mint-o’, ‘B Natural’, ‘Candyman’ and ‘GumOn’. In line with the Company’s strategic
objective of being the leader in the premium segment, ITC Foods offers an array of top-end
products like ‘Aashirvaad Select’, ‘Aashirvaad Atta with Multigrains’ and ‘Aashirvaad Atta with
Methi’, ‘Aashirvaad Superior MP’; ‘Aashirvaad Svasti’ ghee; ‘ITC Master Chef’ spices; ‘Sunfeast
Dark Fantasy Choco Fills’ and ‘Sunfeast Dark Fantasy Choco Meltz’; ‘Sunfeast Delishus Nuts
& Raisins’ and ‘Sunfeast Delishus Nut Biscotti’ biscuits; and ‘Yumfills Whoopie Pie’. During
the year, the Business launched the ‘Sunfeast Delishus Gourmet cookies - Chocolate Chip
made with Ghana Cocoa’, ‘Sunfeast Farmlite Oats with Chocolate’ and ‘Sunfeast Marie Light
Rich Taste’. The portfolio also includes the health biscuit, ‘Sunfeast Farmlite’ in two variants
(Almonds and Raisins), and a range of cookies, ‘Sunfeast Mom’s Magic’ (Rich Butter and
Cashew & Almonds). ITC also forayed into the Dairy category with the launch of ‘Aashirvaad
Svasti’ – Pure Cow Ghee in select markets. The Business recently launched a range of blended
spices in select markets under the ‘ITC Master Chef’ brand. In Beverages, the ‘B Natural’
range of juices garnered impressive consumer traction in a relatively short span of time.

15

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Personal Care Products
Specially crafted for Indian preferences, ITC’s personal care products
portfolio offers a range of internationally benchmarked grooming and
personal wash products. Anchored on extensive consumer and market
research based product development, ITC’s personal care brands ‘Essenza
Di Wills’, ‘Fiama Di Wills’, ‘Engage’, ‘Savlon’, ‘Shower to Shower’, ‘Vivel’, ‘Cell
Renew’ and ‘Superia’ offer products with relevant, differentiated benefits to
the discerning consumer. During the year, the Business launched several
differentiated product offerings in the Soaps, Shower Gel, Skin Care and
Deodorant categories under the ‘Fiama Di Wills’, ‘Vivel’, ‘Engage’ and
‘Superia’ brands, besides establishing presence in the Health & Hygiene
category leveraging the recently acquired ‘Savlon’ and ‘Shower to Shower’
brands. The Company entered the fast-growing Hand Wash category with the
introduction of Savlon Hand Wash in three variants. Other launches include
‘Fiama Di Wills Double Moisturiser Bathing Bar’, ‘Vivel Neem’, ‘Superia Silk
Cherry’ bar soaps and a regimen of skin care products such as ‘Makeup
Cleanser’, ‘Clarifying Skin Toner’ and ‘Night Cream’ under the ‘Vivel Cell
Renew’ brand. The Engage range of deodorants gained further momentum
during the year and strengthened its No.2 position in the category. The
portfolio was fortified during the year with the addition of ‘Engage Perfume
Sprays’ in two variants each for men and women.

Cigarettes
ITC reinforced its leadership position in the cigarette industry by leveraging
its comprehensive product portfolio and world-class execution capabilities.

Lifestyle Retailing
ITC’s Lifestyle Retailing Business continues to grow its market standing by
investing in brand building, enhancing product vitality and supply chain
capabilities; expanding its retail footprint across the country. Synonymous
with Fashion and Elegance, the Wills Lifestyle range of apparels offers a
premium lifestyle wardrobe for Indian men and women at over 100 exclusive
16

Organisational Profile
specialty stores in 50 cities, 350 outlets in
leading departmental stores and multi-brand
outlets and 6 exclusive boutiques across
ITC Hotels. With its high fashion imagery,
rich product mix and delightful shopping
experience, the brand offers a tempting
choice of ‘Wills Classic’ formal wear, ‘Wills
Sport’ relaxed wear, ‘Wills Clublife’ evening
wear and ‘Wills Signature’ designer wear.
During the year, the premium imagery of
the ‘Wills Classic’ range was sharpened with
the introduction of a finely crafted range of
offerings under the ‘Luxuria’ and ‘Regalia’
collection and natural-fibre products such as
linens under the ‘Ecostyle’ collection.

Saathi, a value brand of notebooks, is
targeted at smaller markets. The Paperkraft
brand is the leading provider of premium
executive & office paper stationery, including
notebook ranges of Green Impression and
Signature Series as well as an assortment
of premium pens. The Business recently
launched several differentiated offerings
under the ‘Classmate’, ‘Classmate Pulse’,
‘Paperkraft’ and ‘Saathi’ brands, including
products in innovative formats like Paperkraft
notebooks with unique covers and Classmate
Octane pens. Offering the greenest range of
stationery products, supported by a green
wood fibre value chain that creates largescale livelihoods in rural India, Classmate and
‘John Players’, which has emerged as a Paperkraft notebooks are an embodiment of
leading brand in the ‘Youth fashion’ segment, the environmental capital built by ITC in its
embodies the essence of the Indian youth that paper business.
is free-spirited, playful and fashionable. The
brand presents smart formals, trendy casuals Safety Matches and Incense
and edgy denims incorporating an exciting Sticks (Agarbattis)
mix of colours, patterns, styling and fits. John
Players is present pan-India with over 400 ITC’s ‘Mangaldeep’ brand, offering a range
flagship stores and 1200 outlets in leading of well-crafted products, is one the fastest
departmental stores and multi-brand outlets. growing agarbatti brands in the country.
ITC also enjoys leadership position in the
‘Dhoop’ segment.
Education and Stationery

Products

ITC’s Education and Stationery Products
Business offers consumers a wide range of
differentiated products under the brands
‘Classmate’, ‘Classmate Pulse’, ‘Paperkraft’
and ‘Saathi’. A clear market leader in the
student notebooks segment, Classmate’s
portfolio also includes writing instruments
(pens & pencils) and scholastic products
(mathematical drawing instruments, scales,
erasers & sharpeners). ‘Colour Crew’, a sub
brand of Classmate, offers an exciting range
of superior quality student art materials
which includes nontoxic oil pastels, plastic
crayons, wax crayons and sketch pens.

While the Agarbatti industry in India
primarily continues to import raw materials,
resulting in loss of livelihood opportunities
for women and tribals in rural areas, ITC has
implemented several measures, including
facilitating the mechanisation of agarbatti
manufacturing at vendor locations and
backward integration by vendors into raw
batti manufacturing using indigenous
inputs, to enhance the competiveness of the
domestic industry.
ITC is also the leader in the Safety Matches
category with ‘Aim’ being the largest selling
brand in the industry.

17

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Hotels
With more than 100 hotels in over 70 destinations in the country, ITC Hotels has redefined the
fine art of hospitality. ITC’s hotel group operates under 4 brands: ITC Hotel at the luxury end,
‘WelcomHotel’ in the upper-upscale segment, Fortune Hotels in the upscale & mid-market
segment and ‘WelcomHeritage’ in the heritage & leisure segment. Embodying ITC Hotels’
credo of ‘Responsible Luxury’, all ITC luxury hotels are an archetype of the culture and ethos
of the region they are located in, offering unique indigenous experiences, internationally
acclaimed cuisines and spa, with globally benchmarked standards in accommodation,
environment and guest safety. With a LEED® Platinum rating for all its luxury hotels, ITC
Hotels is the ‘Greenest Luxury Hotel Chain in the World’.

18

Organisational Profile

Paperboards, Paper & Packaging
Paperboards and Specialty Papers Business
ITC’s Paperboards and Specialty Papers Business is the leader in Product Range, Market
Reach, Environmental Performance and in Value-Added Paperboards in India. The Business
is also a leader in the sale of eco-labelled products, volumes of which doubled during the
year. Providing internationally competitive quality and cost, the Business caters to a wide
spectrum of packaging, graphic, communication, writing, printing and specialty paper
requirements. The Business established the country’s first Elemental Chlorine Free fibre
line with Ozone bleaching technology and is fully compliant with world-class environmental
standards. It is also the first paper business in the country to be invited to be a member
of the Global Forest & Trade Network (GFTN) of the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF).
Committed to developing a sustainable raw material base, ITC’s pulpwood is largely sourced
from renewable plantations under its Social and Farm Forestry programmes, which provide
sustainable livelihood opportunities to tribals and marginal farmers.

Packaging and Printing Business
The Packaging and Printing Business provides
contemporary and superior packaging solutions through
its state-of-the-art technology and processes. With
multi-locational manufacturing facilities in Chennai,
Munger and Haridwar and a robust technology platform,
the Business offers a diversified & value-added product
range in packaging for cartons, flexibles and tobacco
and caters to a wide range of customers in domestic
and export markets. The Business supplies value-added
packaging to ITC’s various FMCG Businesses. Its plant in
Chennai is India’s greenest packaging facility. Backed
by expertise in design, innovative product development
and cutting edge technology, the Business has won
several World Star awards for packaging excellence.
The Business has also received appreciation and
recognition from its customers for partnering and
enhancing value through creative packaging solutions.
19

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Agri Business
ITC is one of India’s largest integrated Agri Business enterprises with significant presence
across every node of the agri value chain. The leadership position of ITC’s Agri Business is
anchored in its strong and enduring partnerships with farmers across the country, which has
revolutionised the agricultural sector in rural India.
ITC Agri Business is one of the leading domestic players and exporters of numerous
agricultural commodities. It works with farmers to improve the productivity and quality of
various crops and sources the finest of Grains, Oil Seeds, Pulses and a range of value-added
agri products such as Processed Fruits, Coffee and Shrimps across multiple geographies in
India. Backed by decades of expertise, the
Business deploys customised infrastructure
and technology to supply these products to
discerning customers in India and over 60
markets worldwide.
ITC Agri Business’ unique strength is
the extensive backward linkages it has
established with the farmers. The pioneering
ITC e-Choupal initiative is a powerful example
of a development model that delivers largescale societal value by co-creating rural
markets with local communities. A unique
click-and-mortar channel, it facilitates the
two-way flow of goods and services in and
out of villages, transforming them into
vibrant economic institutions. The initiative
serves more than 4 million farmers in over
35,000 villages through a network of 6,100
Internet Kiosks spread across 10 states,
20

Organisational Profile
making ITC e-Choupal the largest digital
infrastructure in rural India.
ITC’s spices business endeavours to
provide food safe spices through quality
differentiation across the value chain and
leverage export opportunities in the US,
EU and other South-East Asian countries.
The Business has developed robust crop
development programmes in chilli and
cumin designed to ‘produce the buy’ on
Integrated Crop Engagement practices
coupled with IT driven traceability systems.
The world-class processing unit in Guntur is
certified to the highest level of global food
safety standards under the British Retail
Consortium Food certification regime while
the analytical laboratory is certified to the
ISO 17025 standard. The chilli sourcing and
production value chain of the Business is
Rainforest Alliance certified and continues
to be leveraged for business growth.

Information Technology
ITC Infotech is a specialised global full service provider, led by Business and Technology
Consulting. The company is focused on creating value through Domain, Data, Digital, Design
and Differentiated Delivery for Supply Chain based Industries (CPG, Retail, Manufacturing,
Hi-Tech) and Services Industries (Banking, Financial Services and Insurance, Airline,
Hospitality), as a flexible, trusted and sustainable partner. It is engaged with over 250 global
clients, based across 35 countries. The company has set up offices in 18 countries and
established 10 global development centres. Leading companies have placed their trust in
ITC Infotech; the company’s top 10 clients have been with ITC Infotech for over 10 years, a
testament to ITC Infotech’s commitment to delivering enhanced business value. ITC Infotech
won the 2015 European Outsourcing Award in the category “Value Creation in Outsourcing”
in European Outsourcing and featured a “Major Contender” in the Everest Group IT
Outsourcing in Banking – Service Provider Landscape with PEAK MatrixTM Assessment 2015.
It also continued to be present in the Leader’s Category for the 2016 Global Outsourcing 100
by the International Association of Outsourcing Professionals.

21

Supply
Chain
Management
Approach

To formalise the sustainable procurement
process, ITC has put in place Board approved
Policies which address the issues of labour
practices, human rights, bribery, corruption
and occupational health, safety & environment
in the supply chain. These policies, meant
for Third Party Manufacturers (TPM), service
providers including transporters, suppliers
of agricultural & non-agricultural materials
and capital goods, franchisees, dealers and
distributors collectively referred to as supply
chain partners, define the structure around
which efforts are directed for continually
improving the sustainability performance
along the supply chain. A ‘Code of Conduct
for Vendors and Service providers’ details
out specific requirements related to the
aspects addressed in the policies and through
acceptance of this code by supply chain
partners, ITC seeks their commitment to comply
with applicable laws, respect human rights and
contribute to environmental conservation.

ITC’s vision to serve larger national purposes
is intended to be realised by embedding
sustainability in its core business models.
Innovative strategies have therefore been
designed and implemented to create
sustainable value chains linked to its
businesses. Dependent as the organisation is,
on agricultural resources, these value chains
encompass small and marginal farmers, who
constitute some of the most disadvantaged
sections of Indian society. ITC recognises that
with an expanding and diversified portfolio of
businesses, the actualisation of its vision of
sustainable development has to necessarily
take into account the environmental and
social impact within the supply chain. This
will ensure competitiveness through a
balance between creation of long-term social
& environmental value and the economic Each ITC Business has its own road map
for phase-wise implementation of the
viability of the businesses.
22

Supply Chain
sustainability
policies
and
inclusion
of its supply chain components within
their overall sustainability management
system in a progressive manner. Progress
of implementation of these road maps is
reviewed by the Sustainability Compliance
Review Committee.
As evident from the representation below of
the generic material flow for ITC Businesses,
the supply chains of most of ITC’s Businesses
are vertically integrated. Farmers are the key
suppliers for the majority of our Businesses
as they are dependent on agri commodities,
and therefore constitute a vital part of ITC’s
supply chain. Accordingly the Company has
focused on enhancing the sustainability of
its agri supply chain, details of which are
mentioned in the section that follows.

Sustainability in
the Agri Supply
Chain
Agri commodities
ITC’s Agri Business operations span the
entire spectrum of activities starting from
agri-services/crop development to risk
management, including sourcing, processing,
supply chain, multi-modal logistics, stock
management and customer service. The
solutions offered are a combination of all or
some of these interventions. The solutions
also offer the customers the flexibility in terms
of quantity, product form, timing, as well as
packaging for delivery of the agri commodities.

A simplified representation of the material flow in ITC’s Businesses is given below:
ITC Businesses

Farmers

(Agri-raw materials)

Leaf
Business

Packaging and
Printing

Other Suppliers
Transporters (Other raw materials, service
providers etc.)

Personal Care
Products

Paperboards and
Specialty Papers

FMCG
Cigarettes

Transporters

Agri Business

Foods

Matches and
Agarbattis

Education and
Stationery Products

Customers/
Consumers

*The above diagram includes material flows only and does not include the service industries of Lifestyle Retailing, Hotels and ITC Infotech

: Indicates Material flow within ITC

23

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

supporting villages to become economically,
ecologically and socially sustainable. The
objective is to drive smart & sustainable
development in villages by empowering
Indian farmers through deployment of
Good Agricultural Practices and agricultural
ITC’s Agri Business has been continuously technologies which improves farm productivity,
investing in strengthening capability through product quality, reduces cost of cultivation
multiple sourcing models, customised and while protecting the natural resources.
identity preserved supply chain infrastructure
and network, processing and warehousing The interventions are focused towards
tie-ups, technology enabled systems and deployment of high yielding varieties,
processes and people capabilities. A hub promotion of intact root seedling production
and spoke model has been built along with systems for lower mortality, dissemination
the necessary physical infrastructure that of information and best practices on drip
has enabled multi-level aggregation and irrigation and micro sprinklers for improved
disintermediation where necessary. The yield and lower water consumption, energy
Business also works closely with farmers to conservation initiatives to reduce fuel
develop identified geographies for specific consumption, introduction of integrated
varieties and for certified and organic crops, and pest management initiatives and customised
promote adoption of sustainable agricultural crop advisory solutions. This ensures surplus
practices. This unique approach to creating and income generation in villages, thereby driving
enhancing value in the agri-supply chain has faster development in other areas like health,
sanitation and education.
thus empowered millions of farmers.
These solutions provide a competitive edge to
customers whilst ensuring product integrity
and on-time fulfilment, but also create and
capture better value for other partners,
especially farmers.

These investments coupled with deep
understanding of agriculture, the reach of
the e-Choupal network and the ecosystem
of partners provide the opportunity to offer
a wide range of reliable and consistent
solutions that are efficient and effective along
the entire supply chain.

Each ITC
Business has its
own road map
for phase-wise
implementation
of the
sustainability
policies and
inclusion of its
supply chain
components
within their
overall
sustainability
management
system

24

The efforts undertaken by the Division to make
tobacco production economically, ecologically
and socially sustainable, are recognised
and considered to be the benchmark in
leaf tobacco industry in India and the
same is verified periodically as part of
Sustainable Tobacco Programme (STP) audit
conducted by AB Sustain, an independent
third party reviewer. The verification which
ensures best practices in tobacco farming
and processing is conducted on behalf of key
global customers, covering all aspects of the
tobacco leaf value chain.

During the financial year, the Business
sourced over 20 lakh tonnes of agricommodities (Wheat, Soya, Coffee, Potato,
Fruits, Maize, Rice and Shrimps) from over
20 states to service a range of customers in
India and across several countries, including
Various initiatives pertaining to soil
leading brand owners and bulk processors.
conservation, viz., promoting use of organic
amendments and techniques on soil fertility
Leaf Tobacco
management aimed at reducing chemical
The ITC’s Leaf Tobacco Business has a long- fertiliser use are propagated. Towards
standing commitment to sustainability that’s sustainable fuel management, a three-pronged
focused on helping the Indian farmers produce approach (energy conservation – introduction
more, enhance profitability and thereby of fuel efficient technologies, self-sustenance
improve livelihoods. A major differentiating through energy plantations and custody of
factor that provides ITC a cutting edge over the fuel consumption) has been implemented in
competition is our focused crop development tobacco farm value chain. Energy conservation
initiatives and extension services. Working measures such as Barn Roof Insulation, Turbo
closely with the farming fraternity, ITC has Ventilators etc. proven to reduce about 30%
constantly transferred technology from the of energy requirement during curing are
lab to the land with appropriate crop solutions. being deployed on a large scale in the states
Enabled by a team of agronomists, agriculture of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka. Trials are
experts, engineers and development in progress for development of fuel efficient
managers, the sustainability initiative has technologies in tobacco curing.
helped in substantially improving the quality
With an objective of developing a selftable of the Indian tobacco basket.
sustaining model for sourcing fuel wood, ITC
ITC has been engaged in enhancing rural has developed energy plantations covering
livelihoods through focused efforts by more than 10,000 hectares in 2015-16.

Supply Chain
These plantations are expected to offset the
total fuel requirements for tobacco curing
in our operating regions. Also, farmers are
encouraged to use alternate fuels for curing
such as coffee husk, biomass briquettes etc.

efficiencies and consequent reduction
in transportation costs/GHG emissions/
energy use. ITC will continue to work in this
direction, in line with its Policy on Life-cycle
Sustainability, to identify the opportunities
for improvement in the value chain and take
Going forward, we believe that our approach appropriate measures for optimisation.
of creating sustainable rural livelihoods
ensures surplus income generation to the In line with its commitment to extend the
farming community, which in turn will Triple Bottom Line philosophy along our
minimise vulnerability of the community and supply chain, ITC, as a preliminary step in
drive overall village development.
2013-14, started including the Notebooks
manufacturers of ESPB which contributes to
For further details about our relationship with
around 88% of the total business of ESPB,
the agri-supply chain, please refer to ‘Social
within the reporting boundary. The material
Investments – Mission Sunehra Kal’ section in
aspects of these exclusive Third Party
this Report.
Manufacturers (TPMs) are included in this
Report. During the year, specific guidelines
covering
safety
and
environmental
aspects have been prepared for TPMs
of Notebooks and training programmes
organised for enabling them to carry out
Since ITC is vertically integrated to a large
safety inspections/audits of their facilities
extent, it provides unique opportunities for
to ensure safe operations. On similar lines,
establishing synergy and thereby minimising
guidelines were drafted for TPMs of Agarbatti
environmental impacts through optimum
and Matches, to bring awareness on various
utilisation of raw materials, reuse/recycling
environmental and safety risks associated
of wastes and optimum logistics. As explained
with their operations, which will help them
earlier, agri-commodities being the key raw
in mitigating such risks. In addition, the
materials for most of ITC’s Businesses, they
2-wheeler rider’s safety programme has been
are accorded prime focus in the overall supply
extended to train our wholesale distributors’
chain. ITC’s interventions in this domain along
personnel in order to create awareness on
with community development initiatives have
safe road travel. Going forward, ITC will
not only supported sustainable agricultural
continue to support its supply chain members
practices but also contributed to sustainable
in these aspects.
livelihood creation for farmers. Thus, material
sustainability issues specific to environment In 2013-14, ATC Limited, an associate
have been taken care of to a large extent.
company had been brought within the

Since ITC is
vertically
integrated to a
large extent, it
provides unique
opportunities
for establishing
synergy
and thereby
minimising
environmental
impacts

Sustainability in
the Value Chain

Further, in line with the overall strategy to
embed principles of sustainability into the
various stages of product or service lifecycle, ITC initiated life cycle assessments
(LCA) of its products & services in 2010
with an objective to evaluate the impacts
and identify areas for improvement in the
value chain. So far, LCAs have been carried
out for selected product categories from
Paperboards & Specialty Papers, Packaging
& Printing, Lifestyle Retailing and Personal
Care Products Businesses which have helped
in identifying broad areas for improvements
within as well as beyond ITC’s boundary.
These assessments have been followed
up with detailed studies which in turn
have provided concrete solutions towards
more efficient packaging designs, loading

reporting boundary, where support had
been extended in implementing systems
and processes to improve the sustainability
performance
of
its
manufacturing
operations. Further, 2 TPMs of the Cigarettes
Business have also been included in
the reporting boundary and necessary
knowledge support is being provided
in specific areas like energy and water
conservation, material utilisation, etc.

The Road Ahead
ITC will continue to work along with the supply
chain partners in line with its policies to
enhance their understanding and performance
on sustainability aspects and including their
performance in the reporting boundary.
25

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Certifications,
Honours and Awards
Times. The Pune factory was the
Winner in the ‘Information Technology
Leadership’ category.
ITC’s Paperboards Unit in Kovai became the
first such unit to receive the CII GreenCo
Platinum Rating.
ITC’s Personal Care factory in Manpura
got a ‘Gold rating’ from the Indian
Green Building Council in the Green
Factory category.

Major Awards
2015-16
ITC Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar was ranked
2nd among the Most Valuable CEOs of India
by Businessworld. He was also conferred
the ‘Economic Times Smart Green Leader
Lifetime Achievement Award’.
ITC’s Sankhya Data Centre, Bengaluru
became the first data centre in the world to
get LEED® Platinum Certification from the
US Green Building Council.
ITC Grand Bharat, Gurgaon was ranked Best
in Asia and 4th in the world at the Condé Nast
Traveller Readers’ Choice Awards, 2015.
ITC won the Legal Era Award for the
‘Best Compliance In-House Legal Team of
the Year’.
ITC bagged four National Awards from the
Public Relations Society of India.
ITC’s production units at Bengaluru,
Kolkata
and
Saharanpur
received
the ‘Future Ready Factory’ Platinum
Awards at the India Manufacturing
Excellence Awards (IMEA) instituted
by Frost & Sullivan and The Economic
26

The ITC factory in Munger received the 1st
prize at the FICCI Water Awards (Industrial
Water Use Efficiency category) 2014-15.
ITC’s Agri Business won 2 Gold
awards for Best Exporter of Green Coffee
and for exports to Europe from the India
Coffee Trust.
Wills Lifestyle was conferred the “Super
Brand” status for 2015.
ITC’s Packaging and Printing Unit at
Haridwar won the National Safety
Council of India (NSCI) Safety Awards
2015, Shreshtha Suraksha Puraskar, in
the manufacturing sector for the second
consecutive year.
ITC’s factory in Bengaluru and ITC
Maurya, New Delhi were conferred the
‘Concentrating Solar Technology and Solar
Cooker Excellence Award-2016’ by the
Union Ministry of Power, Coal and New and
Renewable Energy.
ITC’s Paperboards Unit in Bollaram received
the ‘Best Management Award for the
Year 2016’ from the Labour Department,
Government of Telangana.
ITC has won the Training & Development
Leadership Award in the ‘Training

Certifications, Honours and Awards
Program for Change Management’
category, organised by the World
HRD Congress.
ITC’s Kolkata factory was conferred the
Indian Chamber of Commerce (ICC)
Environment Excellence Award 2015
for demonstration of excellence in
Environmental Management Systems.
ITC Grand Bharat features in Robb Report’s
‘Best of the Best’ luxury list. It is the only
hotel from India to feature in the list.
ITC Green Centre, Manesar has been
awarded the First Prize in State-Level
Energy Conservation for the year
2013-14 under BEE star-rated buildings
for the promotion of construction of BEE
star-rated buildings.
ITC factory in Saharanpur was awarded
the National Award from the Employers’
Federation of India for strong commitment
to employee relations.
ITC Rajputana was awarded the Rajasthan
Energy Conservation Award - 2015 in the
category of Buildings (Hotels).
ITC’s Packaging and Printing Unit in
Tiruvottiyur has been conferred the
‘Excellent Energy Efficient Unit’ award at
the 16th CII National Award for Excellence
in Energy Management 2015.
ITC’s Packaging and Printing Factory in
Haridwar was conferred the 5S Excellence
Award 2015 (runner up) for the Northern
Region by CII.
ITC’s Packaging and Printing factory at
Haridwar was conferred the ‘National
Safety Award’ by the Directorate General,
Factory Advice Service and Labour
Institutes (DGFASLI), Ministry of Labour &
Employment, Government of India.

ITC Windsor has been awarded the
National Tourism Award for the Best
Eco Friendly Hotel 2013-14 by The Ministry
of Tourism, Government of India.
ITC Factory, Bengaluru has been conferred
the Unnatha Suraksha Puraskara by
the National Safety Council (NSC),
Karnataka chapter.
ITC Factory, Kolkata was conferred
the Safety Innovation Award 2015
at the National Safety Convention
2015 organised by The Institution of
Engineers (India).
ITC Paperboards Unit in Kovai has bagged
the ‘Excellent Energy Unit’ award at the
16th National Award for Excellence in
Energy Management 2015, organised by
the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII).
The Bengaluru factory was conferred the
‘Excellent Energy Efficient Unit’ award
at 16th National Award for Excellence
in Energy Management 2015 by the
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII).
The Chirala unit of ABD-ILTD has received
the Best Management Award-2014 in the
large-scale industry category from the
Andhra Pradesh Labour Department in
recognition of its exemplary employee
relation practices and implementation of
Labour Welfare measures.

Major Awards
over the Years
ITC was ranked as ‘India’s
Most
Admired
Company’
in
a
survey
conducted
by
Fortune India magazine and
Hay Group (2014).

The Karnataka Green Leaf Threshing
(KGLT) Unit at Mysuru was conferred
the Prashamsha Suraksha Puraskara
by the National Safety Council (NSC),
Karnataka chapter.

Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar
was conferred the Padma
Bhushan by the Government of
India (2011).

ITC Paperboards Unit in Bhadrachalam
has bagged the ‘Excellent Energy Efficient
Unit’ award at the 16th National Award for
Excellence in Energy Management 2015,
organised by the Confederation of Indian
Industry (CII).

Harvard Business Review
ranked
ITC
Chairman
Mr Y C Deveshwar as the 7th
Best Performing CEO in
the World in its JanuaryFebruary 2013 edition.
27

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar was conferred
the Global Leadership Award by the US India
Business Council of the US Chamber of
Commerce (2010).

ITC ranked 2nd among top companies in
India and 7th in Asia in the first of its kind
Asian Sustainability Rating released by
CSR Asia (2010).

ITC Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar was
conferred the Business Leader of the
Year Award by the All India Management
Association (AIMA).

ITC became the first Indian Company to
gain Membership with WWF-GFTN for
Responsible Forestry (2010).

ITC’s Chief Financial Officer, Mr Rajiv
Tandon, was ranked the ‘Best Overall CFO’
at the ‘Business Today-Yes Bank Best CFO
Awards 2013’. He was also declared the
winner in the category of ‘Sustained Wealth
Creation (large companies)’.

ITC was ranked the world’s 6th
largest
sustainable
value
creator
among consumer goods companies
according to a Report by Boston Consulting
Group (2010).

ITC was presented the World Business
and Development Award at the historic
Rio+20 UN Summit for its Social and Farm
Forestry initiative.
ITC has been presented the AIM Asian
CSR Award by the Asian Forum on
Corporate Social Responsibility (AFCSR),
in recognition of its contribution to
the creation of sustainable livelihoods
and fostering economic growth in rural
communities in India.
ITC
won
the
prestigious
12th
Businessworld FICCI CSR Award in the
Large Enterprise category. The award
recognises the most socially responsible
Indian corporates in CSR.
The FICCI Outstanding Vision Corporate
Triple Impact Award, presented by
the then Prime Minister, Dr Manmohan
Singh (2008).
The FICCI Award for Outstanding
Achievement in Rural and Community
Development,
presented
by
the
then Finance Minister, Shri Pranab
Mukherjee (2010).
Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar received the
Business Person of the Year Award from UK
Trade & Investment (2006).
Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar was awarded
the SAM/SPG Sustainability Leadership
Award in Zurich (2007).
The National Award for Excellence in
Corporate Governance from the Institute of
Company Secretaries of India (2007).
ITC was ranked 2nd among top Indian
companies in the first of its kind Standard &
Poor Environmental, Social and Corporate
Governance ratings (2008).
28

ITC won the top UNIDO Award at the
International Conference on Sharing
Innovative Agri Business Solutions at
Cairo (2008).
ITC was conferred the Corporate
Social Responsibility Crown Award for
Water Practices from UNESCO and Water
Digest (2008).
The Asian CSR Award for Environmental
Excellence, given by the Asian Institute of
Management (2007).
ITC was the 1st Indian Company and 2nd in
the world to win the Development Gateway
Award for its trail-blazing e-Choupal
initiative (2005).
Inaugural World Business Award by UNDP
for ITC’s e-Choupal initiative (2004).
ITC e-Choupal won the
Challenge Award (2006).

Stockholm

ITC was rated amongst Asia-Pacific’s 50
biggest listed companies in ‘Asia Fab 50’ by
Forbes (2010).
All ITC’s super premium luxury hotels
accorded LEED® Platinum certification,
making ITC Hotels the ‘Greenest Luxury
Hotel Chain in the World’ (2011).
ITC’s Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Units at Bhadrachalam, Bollaram, Kovai
and Tribeni are FSC Chain of Custody
certified (2011).
ITC’s Unit in Bhadrachalam has
been awarded the Forest Stewardship
Council Forest Management (FSC-FM)
certification by the SmartWood Programme
of the Rainforest Alliance (2011).

Certifications, Honours and Awards

EHS Certifications
ISO 14001: Environment
Management System
All manufacturing units (except newly
commissioned unit of Foods Business in
Munger), ITC Life Sciences & Technology
Centre at Bengaluru, ITC Gardenia,
ITC Grand Central, ITC Grand Chola,
ITC Kakatiya, ITC Maurya, ITC Mughal,
ITC Maratha, ITC Rajputana, ITC Sonar,
ITC Windsor, My Fortune Bengaluru,
WelcomHotel Sheraton New Delhi,
ITC Green Centre Gurgaon.

OHSAS 18001: Occupational
Health & Safety Management
Systems
All manufacturing Units of ITC (except
newly commissioned unit of Foods Business
in Munger).

SA 8000: Social Accountability
Leaf processing plants at Chirala, Anaparti
and Mysuru, Cigarettes factories at Kolkata
and Munger, Packaging and Printing Units
at Munger, Tiruvottiyur and Haridwar and
ITC Infotech, Bengaluru.

Food Safety: ISO 22000/HACCP
Food Safety Management System
ITC Gardenia, ITC Grand Central, ITC
Grand Chola, ITC Kakatiya, ITC Maurya,
ITC Mughal, ITC Maratha, ITC Rajputana,
ITC Sonar, ITC Windsor, My Fortune
Chennai, WelcomHotel New Delhi, and
Units of Foods Business in Haridwar, Pune
and Malur.

LEED® Platinum Rating by US
Green Building Council (Existing
Building category)/Indian
Green Building Council (New
Construction category)
ITC Maurya, ITC Windsor, ITC Maratha,
ITC Grand Central, ITC Mughal, ITC
Sonar, ITC Kakatiya, ITC Rajputana, ITC
Gardenia, ITC Grand Chola, My Fortune
Bengaluru, ITC Grand Bharat and ITC
Green Centre Gurgaon.

LEED® Platinum Rating by
Indian Green Building Council
– Green Factory Building
ITC’s Units at Saharanpur, Bengaluru,
Munger and Pune.

LEED® Platinum rating (core
& shell) by Indian Green
Building Council and LEED®
Platinum rating (commercial
interiors) by US Green
Building Council
ITC Green Centre at Manesar.

Green Rating for Integrated
Habitat Assessment (GRIHA)
by The Energy and Resources
Institute (TERI) and Ministry
of New & Renewable Energy
(MNRE), Government of India
5 star rating for ITC Grand Chola.

LEED® Gold rating by Indian
Green Building Council – Green
Factory Building
Packaging and Printing Unit at Haridwar,
Leaf Processing Plant at Mysore and
Personal Care Products Unit at Manpura.

BEE 5 Star rating by the Bureau
of Energy Efficiency, Government
of India
ITC Green Centre at Manesar.

FOREST STEWARDSHIP
TM
- Chain of Custody
And Controlled Wood by
Rainforest Alliance
Paperboards and Specialty Paper
Units at Bhadrachalam, Tribeni, Kovai
and Bollaram, Packaging and Printing Unit
at Tiruvottiyur.

BRC/ IOP Certification as per BRC
Global Standard for Packaging and
Packaging Materials
Grade “AA” for Paperboards and Specialty
Papers Unit at Bollaram and Grade “A”
for Packaging and Printing Units at
Tiruvottiyur and Haridwar.
29

Stakeholder
Engagement, Risks
& Opportunities and
Materiality Analysis
Stakeholder Engagement
In line with the Company’s Board approved policy on stakeholder engagement, ITC has a
structured framework to engage with stakeholders and address their key concerns. The
framework is based upon established long-term relationships with key stakeholders such
as shareholders, farmers, customers, suppliers, employees, local communities, regulatory
bodies and the media. With the firm belief that stakeholder engagement is an integral part
of enriching and enduring partnerships, ITC has institutionalised these processes grounded
on transparency and accountability.
ITC’s Process of Stakeholder Engagement

Identification of
key stakeholders

Consultation with the
key stakeholders with
due weightage given
to each stakeholder’s
nature of engagement
with the organisation

Identification
and prioritisation
of concerns and
needs

Addressing the
prioritised concerns
and needs in a
consistent and
transparent manner.
Timely reporting back
to those consulted
on ITC’s action plan

Periodical review of action taken
Transparency and Accountability
30

Stakeholder Engagement
Details of each of the above mentioned steps are elaborated below.

Identification of Key Stakeholders
Identification and profiling
of stakeholders, who are
directly/indirectly impacted by
business activities as well as
directly/indirectly influence
business activities.

Stakeholders’ identification
guided by attributes such as
dependency, responsibility,
immediacy and influence.

Selection of stakeholder
representatives ensuring that
they genuinely represent the
views of their constituents,
and faithfully communicate
the results of the engagements
with ITC, back to their
constituents.

Consultation with Key Stakeholders and
Identification of Key Concerns
Stakeholder

Providers
of Financial
Capital

Consultation Mechanism
Annual General Meeting
Exclusive section in Corporate Website on
‘Shareholder Value’ which serves to inform
and service shareholders
An exclusive e-mail id: isc@itc.in for direct
interaction with shareholders
Regular interventions with institutional
investors

Key Issues
Continued profitability and growth of the
organisation
Transparent and effective
communications
Investor servicing
Sound corporate governance
mechanisms
Regulatory compliance

Government
and
Regulatory
Authorities

Representations on policy issues through
industry associations and other bodies
Participation in policy advocacy discussions at
various forums

Sound corporate governance
mechanisms
Tax revenues
Resource efficiency
Transparency in disclosures
Livelihood generation
Fair and competitive pricing

Customers

Market surveys
Personal contacts/visits
Personalised lifestyle privilege programme
Customer satisfaction surveys
Key account management

Product/service quality and safety
Product/service availability
Transparent communication
Adequate information on products
Timely delivery of product/service
Maintenance of privacy/confidentiality

Employees

Induction programmes/training workshops
Individual performance appraisal
Employee engagement survey
Grievance handling processes
Trade union meetings

Caring and empowering work
environment
Personal development and growth
Employee safety
Grievance resolution
Competitive compensation

31

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Stakeholder

Consultation Mechanism

Key Issues
Inputs on agricultural best practices
Know-how on improvement of
productivity and profitability

Farmers

Regular formal/informal talks
Farmer training programmes and workshops
Agreements for all procurement activities
e-Choupal and Choupal Pradarshan Khets
(demonstration farms)
Participatory rural appraisals to identify needs
and challenges

Easy, affordable and reliable access to
inputs such as quality seeds,
fertilisers, pesticides
Capacity development for further
investment
Sustainable & accelerated growth in
livelihoods and farm incomes
Regeneration and replenishment of
common property resources like water,
village commons, biomass
and biodiversity
Consistent increase in income
generation
Knowledge and infrastructure support
Regular communication and updates on
business plans

Supply Chain
Partners

Manufacturers’ meets
Vendor meets
Pre-agreement negotiations
Agreements for all procurement activities

Inclusion of local medium and small
scale enterprises in vendor base
Competency development of
local vendors
Stability/tenure of relationship
Ordering and payment routines
Purchasing prices
Changes or cancellation of orders

Local
Communities

Media

Civil Society

Community needs assessment activities
undertaken in collaboration with independent
parties/Civil Society Organisations
Formation and regular meetings of village
institutions
Public hearings during greenfield/expansion
projects
Assessment of direct and indirect impacts of
ITC’s social investments on communities

Community development programmes
based on local communities’ needs

One-on-one Media interactions
Press conferences/Press releases
Advertisements/Promotions
Interviews with Senior Managers

Transparent and accurate disclosure to
stakeholders

Partnership in implementation of CSR
Programmes under Mission Sunehra Kal
Discussions on community issues with Civil
Society Organisations

Strengthening of livelihood
opportunities
Improvement of social infrastructure for
hygienic and healthy living environment
Dignity of life through economic &
social empowerment

Responsible Corporate Citizenship
Corporate Reputation
Financial support for community
development programmes
Managerial support
Environmental pollution prevention
Safe products and services
Responsible Corporate Citizenship

32

Stakeholder Engagement

Prioritisation and Addressal of Key Concerns
The sensitivity of an issue to a stakeholder and to ITC, in terms of high/medium/
low importance forms the basis of the materiality analysis which in turn leads to
identification of material aspects, definition of management approach and specific action
plans for addressal.
Please refer to the Materiality Analysis section for further details on ITC’s response to key
stakeholders’ concerns.

Insights into Local Community Needs
Since ITC’s holistic development approach demands an intensive and deep level of
engagement, it was necessary to identify and delineate core areas in the catchments
of our Agri Businesses and factories. Based on parameters relevant to businesses
and development indicators, current project areas were divided into core and noncore villages and clusters. Based on above filters, a total of 103 core clusters were
demarcated comprising 902 villages/wards in 35 districts, which would form the
nucleus of social investments in the coming five years.

The most
powerful
dynamic driving
ITC’s Social
Investment
Programme
is the fact
that each one
is anchored
in direct
community
participation
and rooted in
choices made
and shaped by
them

The most powerful dynamic driving ITC’s Social Investment Programme is the fact that
each one is anchored in direct community participation and rooted in choices made and
shaped by them. The identification and demarcation of core project areas was therefore
followed by an exhaustive stakeholder engagement process to elicit their felt needs and
aspirations to gauge the extent to which the current set of interventions were valued by
the communities and evaluate if any course correction was required.
A total of 483 Participatory Rural Appraisals (PRA) were conducted covering more than
half of the total core villages/habitations. Since PRAs are public meetings where the
voices of marginalised communities and groups may not be heard, care was taken that
separate PRAs were conducted with women and SC/ST households.
The table gives an overview of the topmost priorities identified by our stakeholder
communities from across all geographies. An aggregation such as this obviously
flattens variations between regions and social groups. But it nevertheless is indicative
of some of the foremost concerns troubling households in our core catchment areas.
It is interesting to note that even though
a large proportion of households in the
core areas are from rural regions, only
two of the top ten requirements relate
to agriculture (highlighted in green).
The balance eight reflect a strong desire
to lead a better quality of life today
(shown in brown) or aspirations for
their children (indicated in blue). While
people aspire for an improvement in the
quality of life today, they are equally
concerned that their children grow into
a healthy, educated and skilled resource
with the capabilities to compete in the
employment markets of tomorrow. With
respect to implications for ITC, it is worth
noting that barring public infrastructure
works, our projects currently cover 6 of
the 10 needs listed above.

Stakeholders’ Priorities

Rank

Drinking Water

1

Internal Roads

2

Employment

3

Toilets/Sanitation

4

Drainage Facilities

5

School Infrastructure

6

Waste Management

7

Water Resources
Development

8

Street Lights

9

Cattle Development

10
33

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Risks and
Opportunities:
Sustainability
Challenges
Sustainability Risk Portfolio

As a diversified
enterprise,
ITC continues
to focus on a
system-based
approach to
business risk
management

34

As a diversified enterprise, ITC continues
to focus on a system-based approach to
business risk management. The Corporate
Risk Management Cell, through focused
interactions with Businesses, facilitates the
identification and prioritisation of strategic
and operational risks, development of
appropriate mitigation strategies and
conducts periodic reviews of the progress
on the management of identified risks.
The annual planning exercise requires all
Businesses to clearly identify their top
risks and set out a mitigation plan with
agreed timelines and accountability. The
senior management of the Company also
periodically review the risk management
framework to keep it contemporary and
relevant so as to effectively address
the emerging challenges in a dynamic
business environment.

Global Challenges
According to the World Economic Forum
(WEF) Report on Global Risks 2016, largescale migration, extreme weather events,
climate change, interstate conflict with
regional consequences, water crises and
volatility in energy prices are amongst the
top risks that plague the world today.
Socio-Economic Risks
Some of these topmost risks that endanger
the world today are short-term and arise as
a direct outcome of human action, including
interstate conflicts, collapse of states,
governance deficits, large-scale terrorist
attacks and migration. In 2015, Europe
witnessed rising number of refugees and
migrants seeking asylums in the European
Union, from Middle East, Africa, South Asia
and the Western Balkans, fleeing war and
persecution, poverty and lack of employment
in their home countries.

In addition to high refugee crisis, stability
within the European Union is further
threatened by stagnating economies
and growth of far-right political parties.
Other factors such as extreme energy
price volatility will further aggravate
Based on the ongoing risk assessments these stresses.
at Businesses level and aggregated at the
organisation level, ITC has classified its In addition, the world today faces the
sustainability challenges into two broad growing concern of unemployment and
categories – those that are influenced by underemployment contributing to rising
global events, and challenges that are socio-economic inequality. This is reflected
in the fact that more than 45% of the global
unique to India.

Stakeholder Engagement
household wealth is owned by less than 1% developed and developing countries are
of the world’s adult population1.
however vastly different, both in scale and
scope. These differences are multi-layered
Food crises is another challenge that and multi-faceted given the dimensions
threatens the world today. While enough of the challenges and the socio-economic
food is available for everyone on the planet, context in different countries. Countries like
still 795 million people go to bed hungry India while cognising for the larger global
every day as it is estimated1 that thirty challenges, will have to shape their own
to fifty percent of all food produced gets sustainability agenda with focus on specific
wasted due to inadequate storage and issues that have an immediate and direct
transportation facilities.
impact on the Indian society at large.
Environmental Risks
The list for long-term global risks is
dominated by those related to physical
and environmental issues such as climate
change and water security. The world
will not be able to meet the sustainable
development challenges of the 21st century
— human development, livable cities, food
security and energy security — without
improving management of water resources
and ensuring reliable access to water.
Population and economic growth have
placed unprecedented pressures on water.
As per a World Bank Report, with current
practices the world will face a 40% shortfall
between forecast demand and available
supply of water by 2030. The potential for
climate change to exacerbate water crisis
with impacts including conflicts and forced
migration has been highlighted in the WEF
Global Risk Report 2016.
Global risks transcend borders and spheres
of influence, which require all stakeholders
to work together. The anticipated and real
impacts for the above issues amongst
1
2

The Indian Context
While India echoes many of the global
challenges, issues like poverty, social
inequities, unemployment, environmental
degradation, water and food crises assume
even more critical and multi-dimensional
characteristics in India. Land pressure for
instance, assumes greater significance in
India which is home to 18% of the world’s
population, with only 2.3% of the world’s
land share.
Nexus of Social and Environmental Issues
India Inc. is faced with serious challenges due
to water crisis. While agriculture accounts
for around three quarters of all water used
in India, rapid urbanisation and increasing
demand from commercial and industrial users
have placed undue stress on already fragile
water resources. According to the World
Resources Institute estimate2, the national
supply of water is expected to fall 50%
below demand by 2030. Despite substantial
rise in demand, India’s water supply remains
constrained owing to inefficient use of water,

The Global Opportunities Network Report 2015
Charting our water future, Water Resources group, 2009

35

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

overexploitation of ground water reserves Climate Change
without adequate recharge and variations in
With the United Nations Climate Change
surface water availability because of erratic
Conference of Parties-21 held in Paris
rainfall patterns.
(December 2015), a change in the global
climate change politics is round the corner.
Agriculture and allied activities remain
India has submitted its Intended Nationally
the major source of livelihood for nearly
Determined Contribution (INDC) to United
half of the Indian population. The share
Nations Framework Convention on Climate
of agriculture in employment was 48.9%
Change (UNFCCC) stating its aim to cut
of the workforce, while its share in the
its greenhouse gas emissions per unit of
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) was 17.4%
gross domestic product by 33 to 35% by
in 2014-153.
2030 compared to 2005 levels. This in turn
However, deteriorating natural resource would imply specific targets for progressive
base, disconnected value chains, fragmented reduction in GHG emissions intensity for the
and
small-size
landholdings,
weak various industrial sectors of India. As sector
infrastructure, inadequate knowledge and specific targets would become a reality
multiple intermediaries are main reasons sooner or later, Indian industries need to
for low income among the average farmers. revisit their individual GHG contribution
Furthermore, around 55% of India’s total sown with representative projection till 2030 and
area meets its requirements from rainwater adopt a low carbon growth trajectory. In
alone. This assumes importance in the face addition, Indian industry sector would also
of climate change related challenges of face the significant challenges due to price
erratic rainfall leading to drought and floods. volatility in the global energy market, which
A majority of the farmers are hence trapped may hamper investments into the renewable
in a vicious cycle of low productivity. energy projects.
Therefore there is a need to address these
challenges by ensuring farming population’s
sustainable access to water, knowledge
and other necessary resources, whilst
simultaneously improving the productivity
resulting in better income realisation. The
surplus workforce from the agriculture sector
can be provided with adequate skill training
to enable them to join the manufacturing
sector strengthening the Government of
India’s “Make in India” campaign.
3

36

Source : Economic survey 2016-17

Social Infrastructure
As a growing economy, India has to deal
with the problems of rapid and unplanned
urbanisation.
Increasing
population,
higher consumption levels and inadequate
infrastructure are putting a severe strain
on the ecology. A large amount of waste
being generated today ends up in landfills,
leading to serious concerns of public health
and sanitation risks as well as large-scale

Stakeholder Engagement
environmental
degradation.
Negative
impacts of urbanisation are also manifest
in the pollution of almost all Indian rivers
that have been absorbing domestic and
industrial sewage and agricultural wastes
over the last few decades. Apart from posing
a serious health problem to millions of
people that continue to depend on polluted
water from rivers, this also endangers the
biodiversity dependent on it. It is therefore
the need of the hour for the country to invest
in basic infrastructure. This will further
require enormous resources that can only be
generated with a larger focus on livelihood
creation and widening of the tax base.
In the light of rapid urbanisation, road
safety has also emerged to be a growing
and alarming national concern. Over the
years, the significant growth of vehicles on
Indian roads has been the leading cause of
accidents resulting in deaths, disabilities and
hospitalisations with severe socio-economic
costs across the country. According to a
report by the Transport Research Wing of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways,

Government of India, during the year 2014,
there were around 4.89 lakh road accidents
with about 1.4 lakh fatalities and injuring
more than 4.93 lakh persons in India.
Such numbers strongly indicate not only
the need for improving the emergency
medical aid and road infrastructures, but
also the need to spread mass awareness on
behavioural safety.

ITC Context
ITC’s operations and markets are India
centric and the Company’s world-class
Indian brands ensure that larger value is
created, captured and retained in the country
for national development and growth.
Therefore the organisation’s sustainability
is closely driven by the country’s advantages
and vulnerabilities. In line with the risks
and opportunities that may impact India’s
economic, social and environmental
sustainability, ITC has mapped the key
challenges, risks and opportunities likely
to impact its own long-term prospects and
those of its stakeholders.

t

p

Lo
w

Health and Safety

Dynamics of Government Policies
and Regulations

Sa
tis
fac
tio
n

Human Capital and
Well-being

pu
lat
ion
er
s

ite
Lim
oc
fS
so
ge
len
Chal

nd Social Inequ
ty a
ity
r
e
v
Po

m en
age
an

Sustainable Use
of Natural Resources

se
ia
dU
nd
f I y an e s
t
ili ourc
s

Co
rp

or

M
te
as

Post
- co
ion
t
nsu
a
ut
me
p
e
a
d
g
e
f
r
i
cultu
R
rW
rain
f
r
o
e
a
l se
ity
at
v
u
S
s
i
t
a
ct
i nab
ct
of Na le Av or o
du
o
a
t
r
ura ila
lR b
e
Continued
competitiveness

ITC’s operations
and markets are
India centric and
the Company’s
world-class
Indian brands
ensure that
larger value
is created,
captured and
retained in
the country
for national
development
and growth.
Therefore the
organisation’s
sustainability is
closely driven
by the country’s
advantages and
vulnerabilities

Own Operations

Supply Chain

ar
tn

Po
al
c
Ca
Lo
P
Employability of
pa
in
ia
a
b
ilit
lM
Ch
er
ies o
ply
ed
p
m
u
f
S
o
S
e
mall-Scal
ia
st
Cu
d

Customer/Consumer Space

Catchment Areas
37

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Challenges

Risks and Opportunities

Own Operations
Continued
Competitiveness

RISKS

The Company’s Cigarettes Business, the oldest in its business portfolio, is increasingly impacted by
a high incidence of taxation and a discriminatory regulatory regime on the legal cigarette industry in
India which have over the years led to a significant shift in tobacco consumption to lightly taxed or taxevaded tobacco products like bidi, khaini, chewing tobacco, gutkha and illegal cigarettes.

OPPORTUNITIES

ITC’s enterprise strengths such as deep consumer insight, cutting-edge Research & Development,
strong rural linkages, superior agri-sourcing, world-class manufacturing, brand-building skills, culinary
expertise, innovative consumer packaging, world-class human capital, digital technology and an
effective trade marketing, distribution and logistics network and sustained investments in R&D, enable
the Company to power its strategy of developing multiple drivers of growth through diverse Businesses.
These enterprise strengths have helped in creating new FMCG Businesses, and fortified its traditional
Businesses. Competencies developed have also lent support to its information technology business.

Sustainable
Use of Natural
Resources

RISKS

Increased water scarcity may directly impact ITC’s Paperboards and Specialty Papers Business which
is relatively more water intensive in its operations compared to other ITC Businesses. With continuous
decline in ground water and uneven supply of surface water, it may become even more challenging for
businesses to meet their requirements. Disruptions in rainfall patterns will also impact water quality
requiring additional treatment and costs before it can become usable. These challenges may bring
about further regulatory pressure on water withdrawal.
Challenges related to energy security due to volatile energy prices and inadequate infrastructure for
capitalising on off-site renewable sources of energy in the country.
Challenges related to achievement of target on energy efficiency improvement, increased electricity
consumption from non-fossil fuel based energy resources that may arise owing to sectoral GHG
emission reduction targets set aligned with Government of India’s commitment under INDC to UNFCCC.

OPPORTUNITIES

As part of its long-term strategy for water security at localised watershed level for the operating units and
other stakeholders, ITC has already conducted comprehensive studies at selected sites and work initiated
to address the identified water-related risks. Going forward with the learning from these detailed studies,
ITC intends to consider and incorporate the aspects of water security for its upcoming projects right from
the design stage and operating units in water-stressed areas.
These risks provide an immediate stimuli to focus on energy conservation and maximising contribution
from renewable energy sources. This should provide long-term advantages in terms of both reduced costs
as well as reliability of support. ITC would also enjoy first mover advantage by developing internal systems
and processes to operate in such a natural resource constrained environment.
ITC’s responsible water stewardship initiatives such as Integrated Watershed Development Programme
will help towards meeting the water security needs of all stakeholders at the watershed level. ITC has also
collaborated with external experts for development of appropriate interventions.
ITC has already adopted a low carbon growth path with goal set for 50% renewable energy share by 2020 as
part of overall energy security strategy. While investments will continue to be made in renewable energy
assets based on techno-commercial feasibility, focus is given on reducing the overall energy demand. This
will not only reduce the carbon emissions but also help in cutting down the overall energy cost.

Health and
Safety

RISKS

While ITC is progressing steadily towards its target of zero accidents of employees within its premises,
ITC cognises that accidents while traveling to and from the workplace are on the rise in India, given the
steady proliferation of 2 wheelers, the poor conditions of roads and inadequate infrastructure.

OPPORTUNITIES

Safe work environment is critical in boosting employee morale and productivity. Apart from best-inclass infrastructure, ITC’s opportunity lies in its robust systems that have been developed over the years
to ensure safety of employees within ITC premises as well as outside premises. ITC employees can also
act as ambassadors for safety and play an individual role in creating awareness on this vital aspect.
38

Stakeholder Engagement
Challenges

Health and
Safety

Risks and Opportunities

Creating a culture of safety though appropriate behavioural interventions.
ITC has well established systems and processes to ensure that its products and services are delivered
in compliance with national or international standards as relevant. For agri-products sourced under
Agri Business division, stringent process control and quality inspection norms have been established
to ensure utmost product safety. Manufacturing locations for branded packaged foods, including
third party manufacturing units, are Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP)/ISO 22000
certified, ensuring that products use the best quality ingredients and utilise the highest quality
processes. In service sectors such as hospitality, these strengths have permitted ITC to leverage the
market to its advantage.
The well-established e-Choupal network coupled with the “Choupal Pradarshan Khet” programme
facilitate small and marginal farmers in accessing customised knowledge on scientific farm
practices, soil testing, balanced fertilisation, foundation seeds and seed treatment, water, weed,
pest and post-harvest crops management and supply of quality inputs like drought resistant seeds to
improve farm competencies.

Dynamics of
Government
Policies and
Regulation

RISKS
Regulatory framework such as the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act and the Agricultural Produce
Market Committee (APMC) Act were framed at a point of time in the past to curb excessive speculation
in agri commodities and to allow farmers efficient access to the market without the exploitation of
intermediaries. But such regulations today limit flexibility for farmers and deprive them of full value
of their produce. In addition, regulations like the Essential Commodities Act (ECA), which impose
stock limits and restrict movements from time to time, create uncertainty in business viability for
organisations like ITC with significant dependence on agri raw material. This acts as a huge deterrent to
long-term investments required to build infrastructure like climate-controlled storages and transport
facilities to prevent wastage.
The Cigarette industry had to contend with a steep increase in Excise Duty for 4 years in succession
along with discriminatory and punitive increases in Value Added Tax (VAT) rates by some States.
Recently, the Government has issued notification increasing the size of graphic health warnings from
40% of the surface area on one side of the cigarette package to 85% of the surface area of both sides
of the package. Such measures, including the tax increases and excessive regulatory regime provide a
large arbitrage to tax-evaded and contraband suppliers. As a result, the share of legal cigarettes has
reduced from 21% in the 80s to 11% today, while at the same time illegal and contraband cigarettes
have proliferated exponentially, making India one of the largest markets for contraband products.
These policies have led to a significant shift in tobacco consumption to lightly taxed or tax-evaded
tobacco products like bidi, khaini, chewing tobacco, gutkha and illegal cigarettes, which presently
constitute over 89% of total tobacco consumption in the country.

OPPORTUNITIES
ITC engages with industry associations, organisations and other appropriate forums in line with its
Policy of Responsible Advocacy. This is aimed to help the formulation of a balanced and pragmatic
policy framework that addresses the concerns of the industry.
ITC has created strong Indian brands in the cigarettes segment, in the absence of which, the domestic
market would have been more vulnerable to the onslaught of smuggled and tax-evaded cigarettes.
Raising the awareness of policy makers and civil society on the menace of illegal and contraband
cigarettes, which impact both revenue and livelihoods of farmers, would help in enhancing enforcement
as well as stemming the rapid increase of the illegal industry. This will lead to eliminating losses to the
exchequer as a result of tax-evaded cigarettes, and help in ensuring that livelihoods of farmers and
others in the value chain are not lost.

39

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Challenges
Human Capital
and Well-being

Risks and Opportunities
RISKS

ITC operates in a diversified, ever-changing, highly competitive global landscape. This necessitates
the development of a strong, customer responsive world-class human capital base. The challenge of
meeting the growing needs of an organisation with the requisite skills co-exists with the challenge of
attracting and retaining the best talents given the multitude of options available to skilled professionals.
There is also a need to nurture harmonious employee relations to enable smooth functioning and
productivity enhancement to be able to support the organisation’s growth and progress.

OPPORTUNITIES

In order to sustain growth and to continue to deliver value for stakeholders, it is necessary for
organisations to recognise human capital as a critical resource base. The over 100-year-old brand
value of ITC provides an opportunity to attract talent from premier institutions. Retention of such a
talent pool is in turn facilitated through a talent management strategy focused upon building a high
quality ‘future-ready’ pool of managers, specialists and business leaders, supported by significant
investments in learning and development and backed by a culture of care and concern.

Catchment Areas
Sustainable
Availability and
Use of Natural
Resources

RISKS

Rapid growth in population and unplanned urbanisation has led to consumption of natural resources
at a rate far higher than the Earth’s capacity to regenerate. Sustainable availability of resources for
industrial use as well as domestic consumption could therefore be a risk in the catchment areas of ITC.

OPPORTUNITIES

ITC’s deep rooted stakeholder centric approach and understanding of interdependence of social and
environmental aspects have enabled ITC to be a pioneer in identifying sustainability issues beyond the
horizon and taking necessary actions. This is manifested in integrated watershed development as well
as afforestation programmes undertaken by ITC more than a decade ago for ensuring augmentation of
natural resources and enable higher productivity, create a green cover and restore soil health.

Employability
of Local
Population

RISKS

Lack of proper education and inadequate availability of requisite skills in local population, especially
from disadvantaged sections of society in the catchment areas is a challenge faced by most of ITC’s
manufacturing units. This points to the compelling need to create a large pool of skilled human
resources from among the local populace.

OPPORTUNITIES

ITC’s deep engagement with rural communities, which has been enhanced by the co-creation of
economic opportunities, has helped in forging strong relationships. This provides an opportunity to
enhance gainful livelihoods of local population.
ITC’s partnership with local Industrial Training Institutes and agencies that impart vocational training
on skills related to sales & distribution, hospitality, construction and technology acts as an opportunity
to enhance the employability of youth from disadvantaged sections of society in the catchment areas
of ITC operations.

Poverty and
Social Inequity

RISKS

Nearly 700 million people living in rural India, with low adaptive capacities, have a direct and symbiotic
dependence on climate sensitive sectors (agriculture, forest and fisheries) and natural resources
(water, biodiversity, mangroves, coastal zones and grasslands) for their subsistence and livelihood.
The limited options of alternative off-farm employment, combined with endemic poverty, continue to
imperil the livelihood of millions of small and marginal farmers with fragmented landholdings, mainly
in rain-fed agriculture regions, where the production regime is inherently fragile and getting more so
due to a number of factors.

OPPORTUNITIES

ITC’s innovative development models based upon the foundation of its deep rooted stakeholder
centric approach, provide the opportunity of simultaneous generation of sustainable livelihood as
well as creation of positive environmental footprint. Such models unleash strong drivers for achieving
development with social equity. The Company’s approach to develop the competitiveness of value
chains of which it is a part, enables the creation of long-term drivers that address the problem of
social inequities.
40

Stakeholder Engagement
Challenges

Risks and Opportunities

Supply Chain
Low productivity
of rain-fed
agricultural
sector of India

RISKS
ITC operates across the agri value chain of 19 crops and is present in 17 states with substantial
investments in resource intensive models that entail heavy capital infrastructure. Since around 55%
of India’s total sown area meets its requirements from rainwater alone, climate change generated
environmental challenges aggravate the risks of low productivity of the agricultural sector of India, in
turn impacting sustainability of agri based businesses.
Low productivity risks are compounded by absence of focused incentivisation of precision farming,
micro-irrigation, watershed development and power-efficient farm mechanisation.
There are inadequacies in the policy framework required to boost the provision of rural infrastructure
so that wastage can be eliminated and farmers can receive better returns.
Furthermore, absence of crop and weather insurance reduces the risk-taking capability of the
small-scale farmers for investment in infrastructure improvement.

OPPORTUNITIES
Owing to long standing presence in the agri-commodities market of the country, ITC has created a rich
knowledge pool of agri-based interventions in terms of infrastructure, connectivity, price discovery,
market access and farm productivity. ITC’s close connect with the grassroots level and effective
dissemination of critical information provide opportunities for ITC to address the challenges in its
agri-value chain.

Limited
Capabilities
of Small Scale
Supply Chain
Partners

RISKS

ITC’s supply chain comprises of a large number of small-scale partners many of whom operate under
limiting circumstances in terms of their ability to invest in efficient technologies and their necessity to
rely on labour intensive practices.

OPPORTUNITIES

ITC’s long presence in the Indian market has helped in understanding the pulse, strengths, weaknesses
and concerns of its supply chain partners, especially the rural population. This in turn has helped in
forging strong relationships with supply chain partners and in capacity building of these partners for
overcoming their own limitations and maximising value.

Customer/Consumer Space
Post-consumer
Waste
Management

RISKS
Average per capita waste generation of India is lower than that of OECD countries or even other Asian
countries. However, the Indian industry is facing increasing pressure on packaging waste, which
highlights the need for more effective solid waste management.
Inadequate solid waste management systems result in a large amount of wastes being generated today
to end up in landfills. Heaps of unattended waste, foraged by cattle and rag-pickers alike, have become
a common sight both in urban and rural areas of the country.
New regulations in this area are not only putting additional pressure on industry to work out alternate
product packaging options but also demanding to develop adequate waste management system based
on Extended Producer Responsibility.

OPPORTUNITIES
ITC’s deep rooted stakeholder centric approach and understanding of interdependence of social and
environmental aspects have enabled ITC to be a pioneer in identifying sustainability issues beyond
the horizon and taking necessary actions. This is reflected in the fact that fibre for the Kovai Unit
of Paperboards and Specialty Papers Business of ITC is sourced from recycled waste. Given ITC’s
century-old significant presence in the country and its close connect with the grassroots level change
makers, ITC has the opportunity to propagate waste segregation at source at all levels of society and to
facilitate effective collection mechanism whilst generating livelihood for rag-pickers.
ITC has already initiated collaborations with government, municipal corporations, NGOs, communities and
other stakeholders to tackle the issue of plastic packaging waste. ITC is devising a multi-pronged approach
not only to ensure waste segregation at source and improve the reuse/recycle rate by raising mass-level
awareness and incentivising informal sector to collect all types of plastic packaging, but also to enhance
the economic value of plastic waste through engaging with regulatory authorities and industry institutions.
41

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Challenges

Corporate
Reputation

Risks and Opportunities

RISKS
Inadequate information or misrepresentation, especially in the media, can impact corporate reputation.
Adverse coverage or feedback on ITC’s Brands and Businesses can impact brand salience in the minds
of the consumer/customer.

OPPORTUNITIES
ITC’s structured media engagement plan comprises an array of activities including press releases/
statements, media interviews by top management, media coverage of important corporate and
business milestones and regular presentations to senior media editors. In addition, presentations are
also made to key stakeholders backed by publications on various issues. These provide an opportunity
to the senior management team to effectively engage with stakeholders on issues relating to ITC’s
products, services, initiatives and business practices.

Social Media

RISKS
The explosion of Social Media channels like Facebook, Instagram and Twitter, which allow individuals
to form virtual communities of common interest and link up with people across the globe to share news,
views, visuals and videos, is posing a new challenge to organisations. Being unregulated, social media
allows instant dissemination of information globally without any mechanism to verify or authenticate
the flow of information. This creates the possibility of spreading misinformation that can impact
consumer behaviour as well as corporate reputation.

OPPORTUNITIES
ITC has created its own presence in social media leveraging publicly available web applications as well
as creating dedicated branded web applications to disseminate information about the organisation and
its brands in the digital space.
ITC’s corporate Twitter handle, @itccorpcom provides an opportunity to engage in the social media
space. In addition, ITC has created customised apps for mobile phones to provide superior and
transparent access to information to its stakeholders. ITC’s Facebook page for engagement with
potential employees, Hub and Scope, is an example of the Social Media interaction. Several ITC brands
like Bingo!, Yippee!, Wills Lifestyle and Engage have a social media presence to constantly interact with
their respective target audiences.

Customer
Satisfaction

RISKS
Customer feedback is one of the vital inputs for any organisation to modify or update the product/
service in order to better address the requirements and sentiments of its customers. Growing
options for customers, increased customer awareness on quality, health and safety, consumers’
expectation on continual innovation and aggressively low price offer from competition, are some
of the key challenges encountered by businesses today in achieving and maintaining high levels of
customer satisfaction.

OPPORTUNITIES
A regular customer feedback system forms an integral part of ITC’s Businesses where there is
direct interface with customers. In the case of FMCG products, consumers are provided several
communication channels like e-mail, telephone number, website address and feedback forms to
enable them to contact the relevant Business. Processes are laid down to ensure that consumers
are provided with responses on their feedback in a timely manner. Customer feedback for B2B
businesses like Agri Business and Packaging & Printing, is obtained through different activities e.g.
pre-season engagement with customers (in case of Agri Business), client visits and engagement of the
Divisional Management Committees with major customers. In the Information Technology Business,
the Customer Service Satisfaction Survey is an annual check on the robustness of the engagement,
culminating in a Customer Experience Index. For Hotels Business, WOW ratio – a Guest Satisfaction
Index is continuously monitored and used for benchmarking and performance improvement.

42

Stakeholder Engagement

Materiality Analysis
ITC’s Materiality matrix enabled the design of the content of this Report so as to provide a
reasonable and balanced picture of the organisation’s Triple Bottom Line impacts and its
performance. ITC’s materiality analysis is based upon the following three pronged approach:

Identification
of material
aspects

Relevance of GRI G4 defined aspects in terms of boundary
of impacts
Cognition of Sector Specific Issues
Evaluation of relevance to stakeholders

Analysis of high, medium or low importance of a particular
aspect based on stakeholder engagement
Evaluation of the stakeholder’s perception of ITC’s impact
with respect to that material aspect

Prioritisation

Significance of a material aspect to a particular ITC
business based on ITC’s Corporate Strategies, policies,
risks and opportunities for the business
Corporate level aggregation of material aspects by
Corporate EHS

Review by various Corporate Functions

Validation

Final review and approval by Sustainibility Compliance
Review Committee on the material aspects

43

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS
Materiality Matrix

High

Health and Safety
Local Community
Development

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Climate
Change

Sustainable
Management of
Natural Resources

Medium

Sustainable
Supply Chain
Product Packaging
& Labelling

Learning and
Development
Anti-corruption
Human Rights
Marketing
Communication

Customer Privacy

Employee
Engagement

Public Policy
Advocacy

Transportation

Low

Increasing influence on stakeholders’ assessment and decisions

Economic Performance

Low

Medium

Statutory
Compliance

Sustainable
Forest Management

High

Increasing significance of ITC’s Economic, Environmental and Social Impacts
Economic

Environmental

Social

Environmental & Social

The matrix above depicts the material aspects based on their influence and significance on
stakeholders’ perception and ITC’s impacts. The categorisation under low, medium & high
demonstrates the relative importance of aspects and does not necessarily depict that a
particular aspect rated as ‘low’ has low impact or relevance.

44

Stakeholder Engagement

Disclosure on Material Aspects
Sl.
No.

Material Aspects

Details Available in Sections

1

Economic Performance

Economic Performance

2

Sustainable Livelihoods

Economic Performance
ITC’s Mission Sunehra Kal for Sustainable
& Inclusive Growth

3

Climate Change

Energy
Air Emissions

4

Sustainable Management of
Natural Resources

Energy
Water Management
Waste Management
Raw Materials

5

Product Packaging &
Labelling

Product Responsibility
Waste Management

6

Transportation

Energy
Air Emissions

7

Sustainable Forest
Management

Raw Materials
Biodiversity

8

Sustainable Supply Chain

Supply Chain

9

Statutory Compliance

Product Responsibility

10

Learning and Development

Labour Practices & Decent Work and
Human Rights

11

Employee Engagement

Labour Practices & Decent Work and
Human Rights

12

Human Rights

Labour Practices & Decent Work and
Human Rights

13

Local Community
Development

Economic Performance
ITC’s Mission Sunehra Kal for Sustainable
& Inclusive Growth

14

Anti-corruption

Governance Structure

15

Public Policy Advocacy

Responsible Advocacy

16

Health and Safety

Occupational Health and Safety
Product Responsibility

17

Marketing Communication

Product Responsibility

18

Customer Privacy

Product Responsibility
45

Report Profile
Scope & Boundary
The 13th Sustainability Report of the
Company, headquartered at Virginia House,
37 J.L. Nehru Road, Kolkata, 700 071 (India),
covers the sustainability performance for
the period April 1, 2015 to March 31, 2016.
ITC reports its performance on an annual
basis and the last Sustainability Report was
published in June 2015.
The contact point for any clarifications on the
Report or for requesting additional copies of
this Report is the Corporate Communications
Department at the above address or e-mail:
enduringvalue@itc.in.

considered while reporting on the Foods
Business performance.
This Report highlights those Triple Bottom
Line dimensions that either indicate
the organisation’s material economic,
environmental and social impacts, or
substantively influence the assessments and
decisions of stakeholders.

ITC’s
Businesses/Units
continue
to
proactively engage with key stakeholders,
who either have a major interest or are
significantly affected by the Company’s
operations, products or services. The details
The reporting principles and methodology on stakeholder engagement are covered
are in accordance with the “Comprehensive” elsewhere in the Report.
option of the fourth generation Global
Reporting Initiative (GRI) Sustainability In line with ITC’s Policy on Responsible
Reporting Guidelines and the Reporting Sourcing, the Company continues its
Principles, Standard Disclosures and efforts to influence sustainability practices
Implementation Manual of GRI-G4 Reporting along the value chain with the intent to
Guidelines have been followed. The progressively cover all significant supply
relevant aspects/indicators from GRI-G4 chain partners. In the current year, ITC has
Food Sector supplement have also been incorporated the performance of 20 exclusive
46

Report Profile Scope & Boundary
Third Party Manufacturers (TPMs) catering
to the Notebooks segment of Education and
Stationery Products Business and 2 TPMs
of Cigarettes Business and ATC Limited, an
associate company of ITC.
The economic performance reported
here is excerpted from the Company’s
Report & Accounts (R&A) 2016, audited by
independent External Auditors – M/s Deloitte
Haskins & Sells.

and conformance with ‘in accordance’comprehensive requirements of the GRI-G4
guidelines has been provided by M/s Ernst
& Young (EY), an independent third party
assurance provider. They have provided
the assurance engagement as per the
International Standard for Assurance
Engagements (ISAE) 3000 at a ‘reasonable
level’, the statement of which forms a part
of this Report. The assurance statement
by M/s EY covers the summary of the
work performed, the manner in which the
assurance engagement has been conducted,
the extent to which ITC has applied GRI-G4
Guidelines and the conclusions on the Report.

The data in the environment & social sections
of the Report is based on actual performance
of the various businesses, factories, hotels
and large offices of the Company, TPMs
and subsidiary companies as detailed in
the reporting boundary. An Integrated
Sustainability Data Management System
established in the Company to collect,
collate and analyse environmental and social ITC Head Office: Kolkata (West Bengal)
data, along with strong internal controls,
support overall integrity and credibility of the Trade Marketing and Distribution
(TM&D)
disclosures in the Report.

Reporting
Boundary

In order to obtain an objective and impartial TM&D Headquarters: Kolkata (West Bengal)
assurance on the Report, ITC has obtained
District Offices: Kolkata (West Bengal)
independent third party assurance for all
Mumbai (Maharashtra)
its Sustainability Reports since it started
reporting in 2004. In the current year, Warehouses:
Ambernath (Maharashtra),
authenticity of the data and systems
Hyderabad (Telangana)
disclosed in the Sustainability Report 2016
and Malur (Karnataka)

47

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

FMCG
Cigarettes Business
Divisional Headquarters: Kolkata
(West Bengal)
Units at:
Kolkata (West Bengal), Bengaluru
(Karnataka), Munger (Bihar), Saharanpur
(Uttar Pradesh) and Pune (Maharashtra)
Third party manufacturers – 2 nos.

FMCG - Others
Foods Business
Divisional Headquarters: Bengaluru
(Karnataka)
Units at:
Haridwar (Uttarakhand), Pune
(Maharashtra), Malur (Karnataka) and
Munger (Bihar)

Personal Care Products
Business
Divisional Headquarters: Kolkata
(West Bengal)
Units at:
Haridwar (Uttarakhand) and Manpura
(Himachal Pradesh)
48

Education and Stationery
Products Business
Divisional Headquarters: Chennai
(Tamil Nadu)
Third Party Manufacturers of Notebooks –
20 nos.

Matches and Agarbatti
Business
Divisional Headquarters: Chennai
(Tamil Nadu)

Hotels
Divisional Headquarters: ITC Green Centre,
Gurgaon (Haryana)

Hotels:

ITC Maurya (New Delhi)
ITC Maratha (Mumbai)
ITC Grand Central (Mumbai)
ITC Sonar (Kolkata)
ITC Mughal (Agra)
ITC Grand Bharat (Gurgaon)
ITC Windsor (Bengaluru)
ITC Gardenia (Bengaluru)
ITC Rajputana (Jaipur)
ITC Grand Chola (Chennai)
My Fortune, Chennai
My Fortune, Bengaluru
WelcomHotel Sheraton, New Delhi

Report Profile Scope & Boundary

Leaf Tobacco Business
Divisional Headquarters: Guntur
(Andhra Pradesh)
Units at:
Anaparti (Andhra Pradesh), Chirala
(Andhra Pradesh), Mysuru (Karnataka) and
Research Centre, Rajahmundry
(Andhra Pradesh)

Agri Business
Divisional Headquarters: Hyderabad
(Telangana)

Paperboards and Specialty
Papers Business
Divisional Headquarters: Hyderabad
(Telangana)
Units at:
Tribeni (West Bengal), Bhadrachalam
(Telangana), Bollaram (Telangana) and
Kovai (Tamil Nadu)

Lifestyle Retailing Business
and Others
Lifestyle Retailing Business Headquarters:
ITC Green Centre, Manesar (Haryana),
ITC Life Sciences & Technology Centre,
Bengaluru (Karnataka) and Central Projects
Organisation, Bengaluru (Karnataka)

Subsidiaries
ITC Infotech India Limited
Units at:
Bengaluru (Karnataka), Kolkata
(West Bengal), Pune (Maharashtra) and
Thiruvananthapuram (Kerala)

Technico Agri Sciences Limited
Units at: Chandigarh and Manpura
(Himachal Pradesh)

Srinivasa Resorts Limited

Hotel: ITC Kakatiya, Hyderabad (Telangana)

Bay Islands Hotels Limited

Packaging and Printing
Business

Hotel: Fortune Bay Islands Resort, Port Blair

Divisional Headquarters: Chennai
(Tamil Nadu)

Hotel: Classic Golf & Country Club, Gurgaon

Units at:
Munger (Bihar), Tiruvottiyur (Tamil Nadu)
and Haridwar (Uttarakhand)

Landbase India Limited

Associates
ATC Limited

Unit at Hosur (Tamil Nadu)

49

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

The following subsidiaries included in ITC’s Consolidated Financial Statements are not
included in the Sustainability Report 2016.
Names of Subsidiaries

Fortune Park Hotels Limited

*

Surya Nepal Private Limited

*

MRR Trading & Investment Company Limited
(a 100% subsidiary of ITC Investments & Holdings Limited)

Russell Credit Limited
Greenacre Holdings Limited
(a 100% subsidiary of Russell Credit Limited)

@
@
@

Wimco Limited

*

Prag Agro Farm Limited

*

Pavan Poplar Limited

*

Technico Pty Limited

*

Technico Technologies Inc.
(a 100% subsidiary of Technico Pty Limited)

Technico Asia Holdings Pty Limited
(a 100% subsidiary of Technico Pty Limited)

Technico Horticultural (Kunming) Co. Limited
(a 100% subsidiary of Technico Asia Holdings Pty Limited)

ITC Infotech Limited
(a 100% subsidiary of ITC Infotech India Limited)

ITC Infotech (USA), Inc.
(a 100% subsidiary of ITC Infotech India Limited)

Pyxis Solutions, LLC.
(a 100% subsidiary of ITC Infotech (USA), Inc.)

50

Remarks

*

*

*

*

*

*

Gold Flake Corporation Limited

@

King Maker Marketing, Inc.

@

WelcomHotels Lanka (Private) Limited

*

ITC Investments and Holdings Limited

@

North East Nutrients Private Limited

*

Report Profile Scope & Boundary
The following Jointly controlled entities (incorporated Joint Ventures) included in ITC’s
Consolidated Financial Statements are not included in the Sustainability Report 2016:
Names of Joint Ventures

Remarks

Maharaja Heritage Resorts Limited

#

Espirit Hotels Private Limited

#

Logix Developers Private Limited

#

ITC Essentra Limited
(a joint venture of Gold Flake Corporation Limited)

#

The following Group’s Associates included in ITC’s Consolidated Financial Statements are
not included in the Sustainability Report 2016:
Name

Remarks

Gujarat Hotels Limited

#

International Travel House Limited

#

Russell Investments Limited

@

Divya Management Limited

@

Antrang Finance Limited

@

* ITC is currently in the process of defining the system for inclusion of these entities in the Sustainability
Reporting boundary. Going forward, the performance of these entities against identified material aspects will
be reported in a progressive manner.
# These entities will be progressively included within the reporting boundary, as part of ITC’s supply chain, based
on identified material aspects.
@ These entities primarily invest in financial market instruments and do not have any material
sustainability impacts.

51

Governance
Structure
The Company’s Corporate Governance processes are designed to support effective
management of multiple businesses while retaining focus on each one of them. The practice
of Corporate Governance at ITC takes place at three interlinked levels.

52

Strategic supervision

by the Board of Directors (Board)

Strategic management

by the Corporate Management Committee (CMC)

Executive management

by the Divisional/Strategic Business Unit (SBU) Chief
Executive assisted by the respective Divisional/SBU
Management Committee

Governance Structure

BOARD OF DIRECTORS

CSR AND
SUSTAINABILITY
COMMITTEE

AUDIT
COMMITTEE

NOMINATION &
COMPENSATION
COMMITTEE

CORPORATE
MANAGEMENT
COMMITTEE

SECURITYHOLDERS
RELATIONSHIP
COMMITTEE

INDEPENDENT
DIRECTORS
COMMITTEE

DIVISIONAL/SBU
MANAGEMENT COMMITTEES

CORPORATE FUNCTIONS

Divisional/SBU Management
Committees, each headed by a
Divisional/SBU Chief Executive

Planning & Treasury, Accounting,
Taxation, Risk Management, Legal,
Secretarial, Internal Audit, EHS,
Human Resources, Corporate
Communications, Corporate
Affairs, Research & Development,
Central Projects Organisation and
IT Support Services

Businesses include:
FMCG, Hotels, Paperboards, Specialty
Papers & Packaging, Agri Business
and Information Technology

Corporate Functions include:

The role, powers and composition of the Board, Board Committees and CMC are available on the Company’s
corporate website.

Board Of Directors

and diversity of perspectives appropriate to
the Company. The Articles of Association
The ITC Board is a balanced Board comprising of the Company provide that the strength
Executive Directors and Non-Executive of the Board shall not be fewer than five
Directors, including Independent Directors. nor more than eighteen.

Selection of Directors

Directors are appointed/re-appointed
with the approval of the Shareholders for
a period of three to five years or a shorter
duration, in accordance with retirement
guidelines as determined by the Board
from time to time. The initial appointment
of Executive Directors is normally for a
period of three years. All Directors, other
than Independent Directors, are liable
to retire by rotation unless otherwise
approved by the Shareholders or provided
under any statute.

The Nomination & Compensation Committee
of the Board has approved the criteria
for determining qualifications, positive
attributes and independence of Directors
as required under the Companies Act, 2013
and the Rules thereunder. The Governance
Policy of the Company also, inter alia,
requires that Non-Executive Directors,
including Independent Directors, be drawn
from amongst eminent professionals with
experience in business/finance/law/public
administration & enterprises. The Board The Independent Directors have confirmed
Diversity Policy of the Company requires the that they meet the criteria of ‘Independence’
Board to have balance of skills, experience as stipulated under the statute.

53

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Composition of the Board
The strength of the Board as on 31st March, 2016 was fifteen; the composition of the Board,
including other Directorship/Committee membership of Directors was as follows:

No. of other
Directorship(s)

No. of Membership(s)/Chairmanship(s)
of Audit Committee/Stakeholders
Relationship Committee of other Indian
public limited companies

Y. C. Deveshwar

6

Nil

N. Anand

7

Nil

S. Puri

3

Nil

R. Tandon

10

6 [including 5 as Chairman]

Director

Executive Directors

Non-Executive Directors – Independent Directors
A. Baijal

6

3 [including 2 as Chairman]

Nil

Nil

A. Duggal

6

5 [including 1 as Chairman]

S. B. Mathur

10

6 [including 1 as Chairman]

P. B. Ramanujam

Nil

Nil

S. S. H. Rehman

Nil

Nil

2

1

S. Banerjee

M. Shankar

Non-Executive Directors – Others
A. V. Girija Kumar

1

Nil

R. E. Lerwill

4

Nil

S. B. Mainak

2

Nil

K. Vaidyanath

Nil

Nil

Note: On demise of Mr. S. H. Khan, Independent Director, on 12th January, 2016, the Board of Directors appointed
Ms. N. Rao as Additional Independent Director w.e.f. 8th April, 2016, subject to the approval of the Shareholders.

ITC’s Governance Policy requires the Board to meet at least six times in a year. During the
year, six meetings of the Board were held.

Board Committees
Currently, there are five Board Committees – the CSR and Sustainability Committee, the Audit
Committee, the Nomination & Compensation Committee, the Securityholders Relationship
Committee and the Independent Directors Committee.

CSR and Sustainability Committee
The CSR and Sustainability Committee presently comprises the Chairman of the Company
and five Non-Executive Directors, two of whom are Independent Directors. The Chairman of
the Company is the Chairman of the Committee.
54

Governance Structure
The CSR and Sustainability Committee,
inter alia, reviews, monitors and provides
strategic direction to the Company’s CSR and
sustainability practices towards fulfilling its
Triple Bottom Line objectives. The Committee
seeks to guide the Company in integrating
its social and environmental objectives
with its business strategies and assists in
crafting unique models to support creation
of sustainable livelihoods. The Committee
formulates & monitors the CSR Policy and
recommends to the Board the annual CSR
Plan of the Company in terms of the statute.
The Committee also reviews the Business
Responsibility Report of the Company.

Chairman of the Committee is a NonExecutive Director.

Independent Directors
Committee
The Independent Directors Committee
comprises all Independent Directors
of the Company.

Chair of the Highest
Governance Body

The Chairman is the Chief Executive of the
Company. He is the Chairman of the Board
and the CMC. His primary role is to provide
The CMC has constituted a Sustainability leadership to the Board and the CMC for
Compliance Review Committee, which realising Company goals in accordance with
presently comprises seven members - one the charter approved by the Board.
CMC member and six senior members of
management. The role of the Committee, ITC has a diversified business portfolio, which
inter alia, includes monitoring and evaluating demands that the senior leadership has
compliance with the Sustainability Policies of in-depth knowledge and understanding of
the Company and placing a quarterly report the functioning of the Company, so as to
thereon for review by the CMC.
enhance the value-generating capacity of
the organisation and contribute significantly
Audit Committee
to stakeholders’ aspirations and societal
expectations. The Chief Executive Officer of
The Audit Committee presently comprises the Company is therefore generally chosen
five Non-Executive Directors, four of whom from amongst the executive management of
are Independent Directors. The Chairman of the Company. The current Chief Executive
the Committee is an Independent Director. Officer of the Company is also the Chairman
The Executive Director & Chief Financial of the Board.
Officer, the Head of Internal Audit and the
representative of the Statutory Auditors are
Invitees to meetings of the Audit Committee.
The Head of Internal Audit, who reports to
the Audit Committee, is the Coordinator, and
the Company Secretary is the Secretary to In terms of the ITC Code of Conduct, Directors,
the Committee. The representatives of the senior management and employees must
Cost Auditors are invited to meetings of the avoid situations in which their personal
Audit Committee whenever matters relating interests could conflict with the interests
to cost audit are considered.
of the Company. This is an area in which it
is impossible to provide comprehensive
Nomination & Compensation
guidance but the guiding principle is that
Committee
conflicts, if any, or potential conflicts, must
be disclosed to higher management for
The Nomination & Compensation Committee guidance and action as appropriate.
presently comprises four Non-Executive
Directors, three of whom are Independent The Directors and key managerial
Directors, and the Chairman of the Company. personnel are required to disclose to the
Board whether they, directly or indirectly
Securityholders Relationship or on behalf of third parties, have material
interest in any transaction or matter
Committee
directly affecting the Company. Senior
The Securityholders Relationship Committee management is required to confirm on an
presently comprises four Directors. The annual basis that no material transaction

Avoidance of
Conflict of Interest

The CMC has
constituted a
Sustainability
Compliance
Review
Committee.
The role of the
Committee
includes
monitoring
and evaluating
compliance
with the
Sustainability
Policies of
the Company
and placing a
quarterly report

55

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

ITC’s
remuneration
strategy is
market led,
leverages
performance
and takes into
account the
Company’s
capacity to pay

56

has been entered into by them which
could have potential conflict with the
interests of the Company at large; such
confirmations are placed before the
Board. All transactions of the Company
with related parties, or their subsequent
modifications, are required to be
approved by the Audit Committee. Further,
transactions with related parties which
are not in the ordinary course of business
or not on arm’s length basis would also
require the approval of the Board or
Shareholders, as applicable.

a manner that fulfils stakeholders’ aspirations
and societal expectations. In pursuit of this,
the Directors of the Company are updated
on changes/developments in the domestic/
global corporate and industry scenario
including those pertaining to statutes/
legislations & economic environment
and on matters affecting the Company,
to enable them to take well informed and
timely decisions. The Directors are also kept
abreast on all business related matters, risk
assessment & minimisation procedures, and
new initiatives proposed by the Company.

The Company has a code of conduct for
prevention of insider trading in the securities
of the Company. The ITC Code of Conduct for
Prevention of Insider Trading - 2015, inter alia,
prohibits purchase or sale of securities of the
Company by Directors and employees while
in possession of unpublished price sensitive
information in relation to the Company.

The Nomination & Compensation Committee
has approved the Policy on Board evaluation,
evaluation of Board Committees’ functioning
and individual Director evaluation. In keeping
with ITC’s belief that it is the collective
effectiveness of the Board that impacts
Company performance, the primary evaluation
platform is that of collective performance of
the Board as a whole. Board performance is
assessed against the role and responsibilities
of the Board as provided in the statute read
with the Company’s Governance Policy. The
parameters for Board performance evaluation
have been derived from the Board’s core
role of trusteeship to protect and enhance
shareholder value as well as fulfil expectations
of other stakeholders through strategic
supervision of the Company. Evaluation of
functioning of Board Committees is based on

Performance
of the Highest
Governance Body
ITC believes that a Board, which is well
informed/familiarised with the Company
and its affairs, can contribute significantly to
effectively discharge its role of trusteeship in

Governance Structure
discussions amongst Committee members and
shared by the respective Committee Chairman
with the Board. Individual Directors are
evaluated in the context of the role played by
each Director as a member of the Board at its
meetings, in assisting the Board in realising its
role of strategic supervision of the functioning
of the Company in pursuit of its purpose and
goals. Visits to Company facilities are also
organised for Directors.

Remuneration includes salary, performance
bonus, allowances & other benefits/
applicable perquisites except contribution
to the approved Group Pension under the
defined benefit scheme and Gratuity Funds
and provisions for leave encashment which
are actuarially determined on an overall
Company basis. The term ‘remuneration’
has the meaning assigned to it under the
Companies Act, 2013. Stock Options have
been granted to the Directors and Employees
under the Employee Stock Option Schemes
of the Company at ‘market price’ [within the
meaning of the erstwhile SEBI (Employee
Stock Option Scheme and Employee Stock
Purchase Scheme) Guidelines, 1999]. The
Company has not incurred any expenditure
for this purpose which can be ascribed to any
Director or Employee.

The Board determines the remuneration of
the Chairman and other Executive Directors,
on the recommendation of the Nomination &
Compensation Committee; remuneration of
the Directors is subject to the approval of the
shareholders. Such remuneration is linked
to the performance of the Company in as
much as the performance bonus of Executive
Directors is based on various qualitative
and quantitative performance criteria.
Such criteria also include the Company’s
contribution with respect to sustainable
development of the society/nation & social ITC believes that every employee is a trustee
investments and sensitivity to environment. of its stakeholders and must strictly adhere
to a Code of Conduct and conduct himself/
Remuneration to Non-Executive Directors herself at all times in a professional and
is by way of commission for each financial ethical manner. Integrity is a core value
year; such commission is determined by
and forms the basis of the Company’s
the Board within the limit approved by the
organisation culture.
shareholders. Their remuneration is based,
inter alia, on Company performance and ITC’s Code of Conduct, has been in place since
regulatory provisions and is payable on a
1996. The Code is anchored in three core
uniform basis to reinforce the principle of
principles - good corporate governance, good
collective responsibility. Non-Executive
corporate citizenship and exemplary personal
Directors are also entitled to sitting fees
conduct in relation to the Company’s business
for attending meetings of the Board and
and reputation. The Code clearly spells
Committees thereof, the quantum of which is
out guidelines for employees on dealing
determined by the Board.
with people in the organisation, ensuring a
gender friendly workplace, relationships with
suppliers and customers, legal compliance,
health & safety, avoidance of conflict of
interest, transparency and auditability in
ITC’s remuneration strategy is market led, all their actions, protection of confidential
leverages performance and takes into information, leading by example etc.

ITC’s Code
of Conduct
is anchored
in three core
principles good corporate
governance,
good corporate
citizenship
and exemplary
personal
conduct in
relation to the
Company’s
business and
reputation

Ethics and Integrity

Remuneration and
Incentives

account the Company’s capacity to pay. The
remuneration package is competitive and is The ITC Code of Conduct is displayed on the
Company’s corporate website and is shared
designed to attract and retain quality talent.
with employees at the time of their induction
The ratio of remuneration of the highest into the Company. A system has also been
paid employee to the median remuneration put in place to get employees to read and
for the year 2015-16 was 435:1. The total sign-off ITC’s Sustainability Policies and the
remuneration of the highest paid employee has ITC Code of Conduct. Any violation of the ITC
decreased by 2% and the median remuneration Code of Conduct by an employee renders
has increased by 1% in FY 2015-16.
him/her liable for disciplinary action.
57

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

The management
of risk is
embedded in
the corporate
strategies of
developing a
portfolio of
world-class
businesses that
best match
organisational
capability
with market
opportunities

A Whistleblower Policy is in place and has
been displayed on the Company’s corporate
website and has also been appropriately
communicated to all employees.

Risk Management
As a diversified enterprise, ITC continues
to focus on a system-based approach
to business risk management.
The
management of risk is embedded in the
corporate strategies of developing a
portfolio of world-class businesses that
best match organisational capability with
market opportunities, focusing on building
distributed leadership and succession
planning processes, nurturing specialism
and enhancing organisational capabilities
through timely developmental inputs.
Accordingly, management of risk has always
been an integral part of the Company’s
‘Strategy of Organisation’ and straddles
its planning, execution and reporting
processes and systems. Backed by strong
internal control systems, the current Risk
Management Framework consists of the
following key elements:
The Corporate Governance Policy and
the Risk Management Policy approved by
the Board, clearly lay down the roles and
responsibilities of the various entities in
relation to risk management covering a
range of responsibilities, from the strategic
to the operational. These role definitions,
inter alia, provide the foundation for
appropriate risk management procedures,

58

their effective implementation across
ITC and independent monitoring and
reporting by Internal Audit.
The Risk Management Committee,
constituted by the Board, monitors and
reviews the strategic risk management
plans of the Company as a whole and
provides necessary directions on the
same.
The Corporate Risk Management Cell,
through focused interactions with
businesses, facilitates the identification
and prioritisation of strategic and
operational risks, development of
appropriate mitigation strategies and
conducts periodic reviews of the progress
on the management of identified risks.
A combination of centrally issued policies
and divisionally-evolved procedures brings
robustness to the process of ensuring that
business risks are effectively addressed.
Appropriate structures are in place to
proactively monitor and manage the
inherent risks in businesses with unique/
relatively high risk profiles.
A strong and independent Internal Audit
function at the Corporate level carries out
risk focused audits across all businesses,
enabling identification of areas where
risk management processes may need to
be strengthened. The Audit Committee of
the Board reviews Internal Audit findings,
and provides strategic guidance on internal

Governance Structure

controls. The Audit Compliance Review
Committee closely monitors the internal
control environment within ITC including
implementation of the action plans
emerging out of the internal audit findings.
At the Business level, Divisional Auditors
continuously verify compliance with laid
down policies and procedures, and help
plug control gaps by assisting operating
management in the formulation of control
procedures for new areas of operation.
A robust and comprehensive framework
of strategic planning and performance
management ensures realisation of
business objectives based on effective
strategy implementation. The annual
planning exercise requires all businesses to
clearly identify their top risks and set out a
mitigation plan with agreed timelines and
accountability. Businesses are required to
confirm periodically that all relevant risks
have been identified, assessed, evaluated
and that appropriate mitigation systems
have been implemented.

in agri-commodity trading as part of its
Agribusiness. ITC has a comprehensive risk
assessment framework and well laid out
policy to manage the risks arising out of
the inherent price volatility associated with
such commodities. This includes robust
mechanisms for monitoring market dynamics
on an ongoing basis towards making informed
sourcing decisions, continuous tracking of
net open positions & ‘value at risk’ against
approved limits, use of futures contracts to
hedge commodity price risk as applicable,
hedging associated foreign exchange risk
through appropriate instruments, assessment
of country risk and counter-party exposure
for suitable mitigation plans. Additionally,
ITC’s strategy of backward integration in
areas such as sourcing of agri-commodities
e.g. wheat, potato, fruit pulp and leaf tobacco,
in-house manufacturing of paperboards,
paper and packaging (including pulp
production and print cylinder making
facilities) facilitates access to critical inputs
at benchmark quality and competitive cost
besides ensuring security of supplies. Further,
each of ITC’s businesses continuously focuses
on product mix enrichment towards protecting
margins and insulating operations from spikes
in input prices.

During the year, the Risk Management
Committee was updated on the status and
effectiveness of the risk management plans.
The Audit Committee was also updated on
the effectiveness of ITC’s risk management
The
combination
of
polices
and
systems and policies.
processes as outlined above adequately
ITC sources several commodities for use as addresses the various risks associated with
inputs in its businesses and also engages ITC’s businesses.

A robust and
comprehensive
framework
of strategic
planning and
performance
management
ensures
realisation
of business
objectives based
on effective
strategy
implementation

59

Economic
Performance

Management Approach
Goals and Performance
Economic Performance

60

Economic Performance

ITC is one of India’s most
admired and valuable
corporations and has
consistently featured over
the last twenty years,
amongst the top 10 private
sector companies in terms
of market capitalisation
and profits

61

Disclosure of
Management
Approach (DMA)

the Company are aimed at strengthening
the mechanisms of engagement with key
stakeholders, identification of material
sustainability issues and progressively
monitoring and mitigating the impacts
along the value chain of each Business,
Inspired by the opportunity to sub-serve
wherever relevant.
larger national priorities, the Company
redefined its vision to not only reposition the With Sustainability at the heart of the
organisation for extreme competitiveness Company’s corporate strategy, it aims to
but also make societal value creation the create growing value for the Indian society
bedrock of its corporate strategy. This through its ‘Triple Bottom Line’ strategy
superordinate vision spurred innovative that synergies creation of social and
strategies to address some of the most environmental capital with the generation of
challenging societal issues including shareholder value.
widespread poverty, unemployment and
environmental degradation. The Company’s
sustainability strategy aims at creating
significant value for the nation through
superior ‘Triple Bottom Line’ performance
that builds and enriches the country’s At the enterprise level, the Company’s
economic, environmental and social capital. goals include:
The sustainability strategy is premised on the
belief that the transformational capacity of
Sustaining ITC’s position as one of India’s
business can be very effectively leveraged
most valuable corporations.
to create significant societal value through
a spirit of innovation and enterprise.
Achieving leadership in each of the business
These sustainability policies adopted by
segments within a reasonable time frame.

Goals and
Performance

62

Economic Performance
Achieving a Return on Capital Employed operating segments was rendered extremely
(ROCE) in excess of the Company’s cost of challenging during the year in the wake
of unprecedented pressure on the legal
capital, at all times.
cigarette industry due to the cumulative
Please refer to the ‘Report of the Directors impact of steep increase in taxation and
and Management Discussion and Analysis’ regulatory pressures, sluggish demand
section of the Report and Accounts 2016 and price deflationary conditions in the
(available on www.itcportal.com) for a FMCG space, and start-up costs relating
detailed discussion on the Company’s market to new products/categories especially
standing in each of the business segments, in the non-cigarette FMCG segment.
as well as the business environment, The business environment in the Hotels
opportunities, key challenges, etc. pertaining industry also remained challenging with the
to each of the Company’s Businesses.
overhang of excess room inventory exerting
pressure on pricing apart from which the
Business had to absorb the gestation
costs of new properties. Agri exports from
India were impacted during the year due
to higher crop output and steeper currency
The global economy remained lacklustre in
depreciation in competing origins. The
2015 with growth slowing down to just 3.1%
Paperboards, Paper and Packaging segment
compared to 3.4% in 2014 (as per latest IMF
also had to contend with a weak demand and
estimates). This marks the slowest pace of
pricing environment.
expansion since the global financial crisis in
2009 and the fourth successive year that the Despite the challenging business environment
global economy has grown at a rate lower as aforestated, Gross Revenue for the
than its long-term average of 3.6% p.a.
year grew by 3.2% to `51,582.45 crores.

Economic
Performance

The Indian economy also witnessed another
challenging year growing by 7.5% in real
terms during the first nine months of 201516 representing a marginal improvement
over 2014-15 (7.2%). However, there was
a marked decline in Nominal GDP growth,
which stood at 8.1% for the period April
2015 to December 2015 as compared to
11.4% for the corresponding period in the
previous year. Other economic indicators
also suggested tepid performance across
consumption, private investments and
exports which have contracted significantly
against the backdrop of a soft global
demand environment. The performance of
the Industry sector also remained subdued
as reflected by the Index of Industrial
Production (IIP) which grew by just 2.6%
during the period April 2015 to February
2016. This was reflected in the performance
of capital markets as well, with the Sensex
declining by 9% during the year (after
rising 25% in FY15), reflecting the sluggish
business environment, slower than expected
progress on the reforms agenda and muted
growth in corporate earnings.

Net Revenue at `36,475.27 crores grew by
1.1% primarily driven by a 7.7% growth in
the non-cigarette FMCG segment and 6.2%
growth in the Cigarettes segment. Excluding
exports of agri commodities, Gross Revenue
and Net Revenue for the year grew by 6.4%

Given the macro–economic scenario, the
business landscape in the Company’s
63

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

and 5.5% respectively. Profit Before Tax
registered a growth of 6.9% to `14,958.39
crores while Net Profit at `9,844.71 crores
increased by 2.5%. Earnings Per Share for the
year stood at `12.26 (previous year `12.05).
Cash flows from Operations aggregated
`14,079.07 crores compared to `13,534.65
crores in the previous year.

For the year ended 31st March, 2016, the
Company has declared a Dividend of `8.50
per share (including a special dividend
of `2.00) per Ordinary share of `1/- each
(previous year `6.25 per share) and has also
recommended issuance of 1 bonus share
for every 2 existing ordinary shares held by
Members on record date.

Direct Economic Impact
Key Economic
Indicators*

2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16

CAGR

Gross Revenue

34872

41810

46713

49965

51582

10%

Net Revenue

24798

29606

32883

36083

36475

10%

Exports

2315

3474

4046

4511

3279

9%

Contribution to
Government/Exchequer

18006

22343

25669

27546

30750

14%

Cost of Bought out
Goods and Services

14255

17031

18391

19764

18955

7%

Employee Benefits
Expense

1258

1387

1608

1780

1884

11%

Payments to Providers
of Capital

5669

6800

7977

8645

8501

11%

- Interest and Dividend

3596

4235

4775

5067

6889

- Retained Profits

2073

2565

3202

3578

1612

* Detailed Financial Performance available at www.itcportal.com

64

` Crores

Economic Performance

Revenue and Profit Before Depreciation Interest and Tax (PBDIT)
` Crores

Year

2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16

CAGR

Gross Revenue

34872

41810

46713

49965

51582

10%

PBDIT

9674

11566

13562

15017

16042

13%

Total Assets and Returns

Net Capital Employed and PBIT

14055

16000
12662

15000
14000

10000

26000

8975

12000

36000

31000

10771

13000

11000

15008

during the year under review, ITC continued
to make significant investments in the Indian
ITC’s diversified portfolio of businesses,
economy across its business domains.
spanning FMCG, Paperboards & Packaging,
Agri Business and Hotels enables it to Hence, while the net capital employed has
have significant presence in all the three expanded at a compound rate of 15% over
sectors of the economy, namely, agriculture, the previous five years to reach `34,807
manufacturing and services, providing crores as at 31st March, 2016, returns on
the Company the unique opportunity to net capital employed (Profit before interest
contribute meaningfully to the growth and and taxes) have increased during this period
development of the country. Despite the from `8,975 crores to `15,008 crores,
extremely challenging business environment a compound rate of 14%.

21000

9000
8000

16000
2012

2013

Net Capital Employed

2014

2015

2016

PBIT
65

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Market Capitalisation & Earnings Per Share
ITC is one of India’s most admired and valuable corporations and has consistently featured
over the last twenty years, amongst the top 10 private sector companies in terms of market
capitalisation and profits. It is amongst the most influential stocks in the Indian equity market.
1996

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

CAGR

Market Capitalisation
(` Crores )*

5571

100476

140408

177360

244245

280708

260864

263989

21%

Adjusted EPS (`)**

0.35

5.31

6.45

7.88

9.39

11.05

11.99

12.23

19%

*Market Capitalisation based on year-end closing prices quoted on the Bombay Stock Exchange
**EPS adjusted for impact of Corporate Actions to facilitate like to like comparison

Analysis of Value Added
While profit growth moderated during the year especially in comparison with the Company’s
own track record, it is pertinent to note that Value-Added by the Company, i.e. the value
created by the economic activities of the Company and its employees, grew by 8% over last
year to `41,135 crores. The Company’s Contribution to Exchequer during the year stood at
`30,750 crores representing a growth of 12% over last year and stand at 75% of the total
value addition made by the Company.
Distribution of Value Added

100%
80%

23%
5%

22%
5%

22%
5%

23%
5%

21%
5%

60%
40%
20%

72%

73%

73%

73%

75%

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

0%
Exchequer

66

Employees

Providers of Capital

Economic Performance

Contribution to the National Exchequer
The Company remains amongst the Top 3 Indian corporates in the private sector in terms of
Contribution to Exchequer.
Contribution to Exchequer

27546

25669

22343

18006
2012

2013

30750

` Crores

33000
29500
26000
22500
19000
15500
12000
8500
5000
1500

2014

2015

2016

Dividend Payout
For the year ended 31st March, 2016, the Company has declared a Dividend of `8.50 per
share (including a special dividend of `2.00) per Ordinary share of `1/- each (previous year
`6.25 per share).
Dividend Paid (incl. Dividend Distribution Tax)

8000
1937

7000
` Crores

6000
5583

5000
4000
3000

6030

6296

2015

2016

4853
4089

2000
1000

2013

2012

Ordinary Dividend

2014
Special Dividend

Local Based Suppliers
The Hon’ble Prime Minister’s vision to build a dynamic, progressive and self–reliant
India through impactful programmes such as Make in India, Skill India, Digital India and
Raw Materials, Stores & Spares Consumed

12000

` Crores

10000
8000
6000
4000

6826

8018

9165

9630

9888

2000
0

1067
2012
Imported

1138
2013

1335
2014

1589
2015

1415
2016

Indigenous
67

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Swachh Bharat, resonates deeply with
the Company’s efforts to create a national
institution of pride. About 86% of raw
materials and stores & spares have been
locally procured during the year.
The Company’s suppliers, both local
and international, constitute one of its
important stakeholder groups. Supplier
engagements are founded on a positive
procurement culture supported by policies,
processes and best practices to ensure that
procurement activity is conducted in an
open, transparent and non-discriminatory
manner. In order to strengthen sustainable
procurement processes, Policies on
‘Responsible Sourcing’ and ‘Human Rights
Consideration of Stakeholders beyond the
Workplace’ have been adopted to address
issues of labour practices, human rights,
bribery, corruption, occupational health,
safety and environment.

ITC’s
sustainability
strategy aims
at creating
significant
value for the
nation through
superior ‘Triple
Bottom Line’
performance
that builds
and enriches
the country’s
economic,
environmental
and social
capital

Financial Assistance from
Government

The Company had availed the incentives
offered by the States of Andhra Pradesh
and Tamil Nadu, by way of deferment of
Sales Tax, which are repayable over a period
ranging from 10 to 14 years. The outstanding
amount of such assistance in the form of
The Company actively encourages competency Deferred Sales Tax due to be repaid by the
development among local vendors and its Paperboards and Specialty Papers Division
vendor base includes numerous medium (PSPD) is given below:
Deferred Sales Tax

100

` Crores
86

80

78
66

60

51
39

40
20
0

68

and small scale enterprises that are
proximate to its manufacturing locations.
Wherever appropriate, vendors are provided
technical support and managerial inputs
to enable them to move in tandem with the
Company’s business plans. With a view to
widespread the ‘Triple Bottom Line’ strategy
of the Company, vendors/service providers
and large outsourced manufacturing
facilities are encouraged to adopt
management practices detailed under the
international standards such as ISO 9001,
ISO 14001, OHSAS 18001 etc.

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

2015-16

Economic Performance
1800
1600
1400

` Crores

1200
1000
800

1024

1112

1331

1505

128
106

148
127

162
115

167
108

1559

600
400
200
0
2012

2013

Contribution to Provident
& Other Funds

Engaging Talent, Local Hiring
and Senior Management
Human Resource Management systems and
processes in the Company are aimed at creating
a responsive, market-focused, customercentric culture and enhancing organisational
vitality, so that each business is internationally
competitive and equipped to seize emerging
market opportunities. The Company believes
that the robustness and adaptability of its
Human Resource systems and processes are
critical for an organisation to remain relevant
and competitive in today’s highly dynamic and
rapidly evolving business landscape.
Towards this end, five capability platforms
relevant to making businesses futureready have been identified – Strategic,
Value Chain, Leadership, Innovation and
Human Resources Development. These
platforms are also designed to strengthen
organisational systems to facilitate speedy
and competitively superior responses to
market opportunities.
The Company is dedicated to nurturing
sustainable
Employee
Relations
and
continues to leverage the ‘Good Employee
Relations’ approach in ensuring responsive
manufacturing, flexible work systems and,
at the same time, maintaining a cost and
environment conscious ecosystem in all Units.
ITC believes that its competitive capability
to build future-ready businesses and create
enduring value for stakeholders is enriched by

2014
Workmen &
Staff Welfare

2015

179
171
2016

Salaries & Wages

a dedicated and high-quality human resource
pool. It has continuously invested in the
human resource capital as seen above.
The Company has Policies on Human
Rights applicable to its employees and
its value chains. The Policies and their
implementation are directed towards
adherence to applicable laws and to uphold
the spirit of human rights, as enshrined
in existing international standards such
as the Universal Declaration and the
Fundamental Human Rights Conventions of
the International Labour Organisation (ILO).
The Company introduced systems to ensure
sound implementation of ITC’s Sustainability
Policies specifically with respect to Human
Rights and Decent Workplace. A system
for employees to read and sign-off the
Sustainability Policies including Policies on
Human Rights and ITC’s Code of Conduct
was rolled out across Divisions. During the
year, 8587 employees across the Company
have been covered amounting to 94% of the
managerial workforce.
The employees are also entitled to retirement
benefit schemes which include employee
pension, provident fund and gratuity.
All statutory payments, as applicable,
e.g., Provident Fund and Family Pension
contributions, are deposited with the
Government in a timely manner.

ITC believes that
its competitive
capability
to build
future-ready
businesses
and create
enduring value
for stakeholders
is enriched by a
dedicated and
high-quality
human resource
pool

The pension plans and other applicable
employee
benefits
obligations
are
69

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS
Contribution to Provident & Other Funds

240

` Crores

200
160

171

120
80
40

106
2012

127

2013

determined and funded in accordance
with independent actuarial valuation. The
assets of these trust funds are managed
in accordance with the prescribed
statutory pattern. The assets of the trust
funds are well diversified and investments
are made with the objective of protecting
capital and optimising returns within
acceptable risk parameters. The funds are
consistently sustained to meet requisite
superannuation commitments.

Corporate Social Responsibility
ITC’s overarching aspiration to create
significant and sustainable societal
value is manifest in its Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR) initiatives that embrace
the most disadvantaged sections of society,

ITC’s
overarching
aspiration
to create
significant and
sustainable
societal value is
manifest in its
CSR initiatives
that embrace
the most
disadvantaged
sections
of society,
especially in
rural India

70

115

2014

108
2015

2016

especially in rural India, through economic
empowerment based on grassroots capacity
building. Towards this end, the Company
has adopted a comprehensive CSR policy
outlining programmes, and plans to
undertake projects and activities to create
a significant positive impact on identified
stakeholders. All these programmes fall
within the purview of Schedule VII of the
provisions of Section 135 of the Companies
Act, 2013 and the Companies (Corporate
Social Responsibility Policy) Rules, 2014.
The footprint of the Company’s Social
Investments Programme (SIP) projects is
spread over 26 states covering 166 districts.
The
Company’s
stakeholders
are
confronted
with
multi-dimensional
and inter-related issues, at the core
of which is the challenge of securing

Economic Performance
sustainable livelihoods. Accordingly,
interventions under the Company’s SIP
are appropriately designed to build their
capacities and promote sustainable
livelihoods. The key elements of the
Company’s CSR interventions are to:
Strengthen and empower Community
Based Organisations for long-term
sustainability of interventions.
Ensure behaviour change through
focus on demand generation for all
interventions to ensure ownership,
participation and contribution.

Continue to work with key stakeholders
with
whom
the
Company
has
enduring
partnerships
comprising
(a) rural communities in the Company’s
Agri Business operational areas and
(b) communities residing in close
proximity to the Company’s production
units. Within these groups, specially target
poor and marginalised communities/
groups to ensure inclusive development.
Remain contemporary by accessing
knowledge/technical know-how through
collaborations.

ITC’s
stakeholders
are confronted
with multidimensional and
inter-related
issues, at the
core of which is
the challenge
of securing
sustainable
livelihoods

Continue to strive for scale in the core Various CSR activities in which the Company
operational geographies by leveraging has been engaged during the current year
are listed below:
government partnerships.

(i)

(ii)

Areas listed under Schedule VII of the
Companies Act, 2013

ITC’s interventions
(including through
Trusts established by
the Company)

Eradicating hunger, poverty and malnutrition,
promoting healthcare including preventive
healthcare and sanitation including contribution
to the Swachh Bharat Kosh set-up by the Central
Government for the promotion of sanitation and
making available safe drinking water.

Health & Sanitation,
Drinking Water and
Eradicating Poverty

Promoting education, including special education
and employment enhancing vocation skills specially
among children, women, elderly, and the differently
abled and livelihood enhancement projects.

Education, Vocational
Training, Livestock
Development and
Generation of Livelihoods

(iii) Promoting gender equality, empowering women,
setting up homes and hostels for women and
orphans; setting up old age homes, day care
centres and such other facilities for senior citizens
and measures for reducing inequalities faced by
socially and economically backward groups.

Women Empowerment

(iv) Ensuring environmental sustainability, ecological
balance, protection of flora and fauna, animal
welfare, agroforestry, conservation of natural
resources and maintaining quality of soil, air
and water including contribution to the Clean
Ganga Fund set-up by the Central Government for
rejuvenation of River Ganga.

Environmental
Sustainability, Soil &
Moisture Conservation
and Wasteland
Development

(v)

Protection of national heritage, art and culture,
including restoration of buildings and sites of
historical importance and works of art, setting up
public libraries, promotion and development of
traditional arts and handicrafts.

(vi) Rural Development Projects.

Protection of National
Heritage, Art and Culture

Agri Development

The expenditure incurred under Section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013 on CSR activities
amounted to `247.50 crores (2015 - `214.06 crores).
71

Environmental
Performance

72

Environmental Performance

Management
Approach
Energy
Air Emissions
Water Management
Waste Management
Raw Materials
Biodiversity

73

Management
Approach
According to the World Economic Forum
(WEF) Report on Global Risks 2016, the
evolving risk landscape indicates a wide
range of environmental risks such as
climate change, water crises, etc. The
challenges related to environment and
ecosystems especially due to climate change
are complex, long-term and inter-related,
especially in terms of its impact on water and
availability of other natural resources.
In order to address these challenges,
environmental best practices have been
integrated into ITC’s operations on the basis
of which, the Company strives to maximise
the efficiencies of natural resource usage
across its Businesses. Furthermore, for
continuous improvement on environmental
performance, ITC’s Businesses have set
voluntary targets on key performance
indicators such as specific energy reduction,
specific water intake reduction, specific
74

waste generation, etc. An organisation-wide
integrated sustainability data management
system supplemented by standard operating
procedures for measurement and recording
provides the platform to monitor the data of
each business on resource utilisation and
environmental impact vis-à-vis production.
In addition, ITC also constantly endeavours
to create a positive environmental footprint.
Large-scale Social and Farm Forestry,
Integrated Watershed Development and
Sustainable Agriculture Practices, among
others, are a few examples of extensive
initiatives in this direction.
ITC’s Board approved Policies such as
those on Environment, Health and Safety,
Life-Cycle Sustainability of Products and
Services and Responsible Sourcing, provide
the necessary framework to address the
direct impacts of the Company’s own

Environmental Performance
operations as well as progressively extend
the efforts along the supply chain (Please
refer to Policies available at www.itcportal.
com). Businesses are progressing in the
phase wise implementation of these policies
as per a defined roadmap.

ITC’s Corporate Environment, Health &
Safety (CEHS) Department is responsible for
reviewing and updating Corporate Standards,
verifying compliance, providing guidance
and support as required. Compliance and
progress based upon the roadmap defined
by each Business is regularly reviewed
It is the overall responsibility of the by the Sustainability Compliance Review
Divisional/Strategic Business Unit (SBU) Committee (SCRC) constituted by the
Chief Executives, to ensure implementation Corporate Management Committee (CMC).
of relevant policies and standards on
environmental performance through the The following sections outline the challenges
members of the respective Management being faced by ITC on material environmental
Committees, General Managers and aspects within as well as outside the
Unit Heads. This also includes institution boundary of its operations, the strategy for
of various committees and designating addressing each of these challenges and
performance for 2015-16.
specific responsibilities.

Environmental
best practices
have been
integrated into
ITC’s operations
on the basis
of which, the
Company strives
to maximise the
efficiencies of
natural resource
usage across its
Businesses

75

Energy
Management
Approach

help of transfer of technology and low
cost international finance including from
Green Climate Fund (GCF).

The world today is witnessing a shift in
the global climate change politics and
policies and a significant impact in global
energy scenario is anticipated in near
future due to 2015 United Nations Climate
Change Conference of Parties held in
Paris in December 2015. India has
already submitted its Intended Nationally
Determined Contributions (INDCs) to United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) with the key aims of:

Creating an additional (cumulative)
carbon sink of 2.5–3 GtCO2e through
additional forest and tree cover by 2030.

In order to meet the commitments made
under INDC to UNFCCC, India’s post2020 climate action plan is focused upon
promotion of clean energy, enhancement
of energy efficiency, development of less
carbon intensive and resilient urban centres,
promotion of waste to wealth, safe, smart and
sustainable green transportation network,
abatement of pollution and enhanced carbon
Reducing the emissions intensity of Gross sink through creation of forest and tree
Domestic Product (GDP) by 33% to 35% by cover. All these in turn would imply targeted
2030 below 2005 levels.
interventions from the various industrial
sectors of India.
Increasing the share of non-fossil based
energy resources to 40% of installed Apart from the impending stringencies
electric power capacity by 2030, with in Perform, Achieve and Trade (PAT) and

76

Environmental Performance
Renewable Energy Certificate (REC)
Mechanisms driven by the committed INDC
of Government of India, the nationwide
thrust for low-carbon economic growth is
expected to lead to an increased carbon tax
on select energy intensive industries and/
or products in order to incentivise energy
efficient production. Furthermore, energy
security, energy equity i.e. the accessibility
and affordability of energy supply across
the population continue to be amongst the

biggest developmental challenges for India
in the context of energy. Extreme volatility
in energy prices, one of the top global risks
as identified in World Economic Forum (WEF)
Report on Global Risks 2016, will further
aggravate stresses on developing economies.
Based on existing as well as the evolving
energy scenario, ITC has mapped its
challenges and has strategised its response
as follows:

Challenges

ITC Strategy

Volatility in energy prices.

Adopting a low carbon growth path.

Existing regulatory requirements
such as the Perform, Achieve and
Trade (PAT) and Renewable Energy
Certificate (REC) schemes.

Goal set for 50% renewable energy
share by 2020.

Future regulatory pressures in line
with India’s commitment under INDCs
to UNFCCC.
Investment risks involved in off-site
renewable energy investments - weak
infrastructure linkages, restrictions
on inter-state wheeling/banking of
electricity, open access etc.

Energy conservation through audits,
benchmarking and target setting for
progressively reducing specific energy
consumption (energy per unit of
product/service).
Investment in renewable energy assets
based on techno-commercial feasibility.
Continuous monitoring and review of
performance through an organisationwide data management system.

Policy on
Environment,
Health and
Safety

Life-cycle
assessment
based
approach embedded in the design and
development of products and services.

Policy on
Life-cycle
Sustainability

Increasing competition for biomass.
Lack of viable alternatives for fossil fuel
to meet thermal energy requirements.

Reducing energy costs and footprints
across the value chain of products
and services which are beyond
operational control.

ITC’s
Sustainability
Policies
providing
framework
for relevant
actions

Accounting of energy footprint along
the value chain and identification of
opportunities for improvement.
Engagement with supply chain
members for monitoring and
improvement of energy performance.

Policy on
Responsible
Sourcing

Progressive inclusion of energy
performance of supply chain partners
within the sustainability reporting
boundary.
Reduction of energy consumption
in transportation of raw materials,
finished goods and wastes.

Within Boundary

Beyond Boundary
77

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Reporting ITC’s
Performance

Facilities of Technico Agri Sciences
Ltd. (a subsidiary of ITC) at Chandigarh
and Manpura

The concerted efforts on energy conservation
implemented across several ITC units have
helped in restricting the increase in ITC’s
total energy consumption to 0.8% only,
In 2015-16, ITC Units consumed 21,946
despite considerable growth in most of ITC’s
Terra Joules (TJ) of energy as compared to
Businesses and expansion of the reporting
21,777 TJ in 2014-15. This marginal increase
boundary as explained above.
of 0.8% in total energy consumption is
directly attributable to significant growth in Energy from Renewable Sources
majority of ITC Businesses. Bhadrachalam - Break up by Sources
Unit of Paperboards and Specialty Paper
0.2%
4.7%
Business that accounts for over 77% of
energy consumption in ITC, has recorded
an increase of 2.1% in its production as
compared to previous year. Similarly, Foods
Business and Hotels Business Divisions that
together contributes to 5.3% of ITC’s energy
consumption, have recorded an increase of
6.5% and 8.5% in their respective outputs.

Energy Consumption within
the Organisation

Sources of 21,946 TJ of Energy in ITC
in 2015-16
3.1%
95.1%

Biomass
Wind
49.6%

47.3%

Solar
Energy Directly from Fossil
Fuels - Break up by Fuel Types
8.9%

1.8%

Energy directly from Fossil Fuels
Energy purchased from utilities
Energy from Renewable Sources
In addition, the reporting boundary in
2015-16 has also been expanded to
include the following units that have caused
an increase of 23 TJ (0.1%) in ITC’s total
energy consumption:

89.3%

Dairy unit at Munger
District offices (Kolkata and Mumbai)
and warehouses (Ambernath, Hyderabad
and Malur) of Trade, Marketing &
Distribution Function
78

Solid fuels
Liquid fuels
Gaseous fuels

Environmental Performance

Energy Consumption within ITC across Businesses
Energy Consumption
in TJ

% of ITC’s
Total Energy
Consumption

% Renewable
Energy Share

2014-15

2015-16

201415

201516

201415

201516

19,503.95

19,580.02

89.6%

89.2%

44.9%

49.3%

Hotels

642.11

668.78

2.9%

3.0%

34.8%

33.4%

Foods

419.56

501.44

1.9%

2.3%

33.2%

33.6%

Leaf Tobacco

414.55

406.26

1.9%

1.9%

11.1%

23.9%

Cigarettes

362.69

320.45

1.7%

1.5%

26.8%

41.5%

Packaging and Printing

277.52

302.64

1.3%

1.4%

31.4%

22.2%

Personal Care Products

50.23

51.18

0.2%

0.2%

0.2%

0.1%

Others*

106.11

115.45

0.5%

0.5%

39.4%

36.4%

Businesses

Paperboards and
Specialty Papers

*Others include Agri Business, ITC Life Sciences & Technology Centre, ITC Infotech, Classic Golf Resort – a subsidiary
unit in Gurgaon and large office complexes.
In 2015-16, additional units that have been added in ‘Others’ are district offices & warehouses of Trade Marketing
& Distribution Fuction, facilities of Technico Agri Sciences Ltd. (a subsidiary of ITC) at Chandigarh and Manpura.

79

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS
Renewable Energy Utilisation in ITC

47.3

12000

30.6
26.3

50
45

38.1

40
35

30.9

30

24.1

25

6000

20
4000

15
10
9392

8175

8802

8133

7957

6622

5909

3571

3437

2000
0

Percentage

8000

35.3

41.2

10375

Energy in TJ

10000

38.5

43.1

5
0

2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16

Total Renewable Energy (TJ)

Percentage of Total Energy (%)

Primary reasons for the increase in renewable
energy utilisation from 9392 TJ in 2014-15 to
10375 TJ in 2015-16 are as follows:
The Paperboards Unit at Bhadrachalam
utilised increased quantity of wood, and
in turn produced more virgin pulp leading
to reduced dependence on imported
pulp. This in turn enhanced availability
and utilisation of black liquor for steam
generation and consequentially led to
lesser coal consumption.
Higher
consumption
of
chip/saw
dust, deoiled bran and charcoal at the
Paperboards Unit in Kovai.

80

Installation
of
additional
solar
energy based photovoltaic systems in
Munger and Saharanpur Units of
Cigarettes Business.
Utilisation of electricity from wind
for the entire year in Anaparti
and Chirala Units of Leaf Tobacco
Business, as compared to around
8 months during 2014-15.
Increased utilisation of purchased steam
generated from biomass in Pune Unit of
Foods Business and Bengaluru Unit of
Cigarettes Business.

Environmental Performance

Energy Savings within ITC

also being incorporated into existing hotels,
manufacturing units, warehouses and office
Substantial improvements in specific complexes during retrofits.
energy performance were achieved at
Targets and Performance
many of the Units by a focused approach
on energy conservation through rigorous In order to continually improve on our energy
third party audits and implementation of performance, ITC Businesses have set
the viable recommendations, coupled with voluntary specific energy reduction targets.
better capacity utilisation. As a result of Accordingly targets have been set at the Unit
implementation of energy conservation level for maintaining this performance.
measures, a total saving of 102.3 TJ in energy
consumption has been achieved in 2015-16. Since the three Units (Bhadrachalam, Kovai
and Tribeni) of Paperboards and Specialty
Papers Division (PSPD) together account
for 89% of ITC’s total energy consumption,
Total
greater focus is directed towards the energy
Energy
performance of each of these Units. The
Savings of
share of these Units in ITC’s total energy
102.3 TJ
consumption is shown below:
Direct
Energy
Savings of
85.7 TJ

Indirect
Energy
Savings of
16.6 TJ

The LEED® Platinum rating accorded to
all of ITC’s luxury hotels, making it the
greenest luxury hotel chain in the world,
implies a significant reduction in specific
energy consumption with respect to
conventionally designed hotels. ITC Hotels
are not only energy efficient by design but
also conserve fossil fuels – with several of
ITC’s hotels sourcing more than 50% of their
electrical energy requirements from wind
farms. In order to continually reduce our
environmental footprint, green features are
integrated in all new constructions and are

Unit-wise Contribution of Total Energy Consumption of ITC

PSPD Bhadrachalam
Reduction in Specific Energy
Consumption by 2.5% as
compared to previous year
PSPD Kovai
Increase in Specific Energy
Consumption by 18.1% as
compared to previous year
as explained in the table on
the next page

10.9

%

77.3%

5.5%
%

6.3

PSPD Tribeni
Reduction in Specific Energy
Consumption by 1.6% as compared to previous year
All Other ITC Units
Improvement in Specific Energy Consumption in most
other Business Units
81

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Performance of these three Units of Paperboard and Specialty Papers Division against the targets are as follows:

Specific Energy
Consumption
Unit of
Paperboards
and Specialty
Papers
Division

Bhadrachalam

Kovai

Actual
for
201415
(GJ/T)

31.4

11.6

Target
for
201516
(GJ/T)

30.8

11.0

Actual
for
201516
(GJ/T)

30.6

13.7

Comparison
against
target

0.6% lower

24.5% higher

Comparison
against last
year

2.5%
decrease

18.1%
increase

Primary Factors

Installation of automated
controls & sensors in power
generation system for
better monitoring & control
and thereby minimising the
losses.
Energy
conservation
initiatives like optimisation
of
vacuum
pumps,
retrofitting measures and
replacement of fans, pumps,
etc. with higher energy
efficient equipment.
Due to grid non-availability,
there was a reduction in
the utilisation of generated
wind power. This had
to be compensated by
electricity generated inhouse (with attendant
auxiliary consumption and
conversion loss from fuel to
energy).
Reduction
in
boiler
efficiency due to change in
fuel .

Tribeni

38.0

36.1

37.4

3.6% higher

1.6%
decrease

Reduction in specific energy
consumption was limited to
1.6% as compared to the
target of 5%, primarily due
to changes in specifications
and quantities of product
orders from what were
considered during target
setting.

For computation methodology of energy consumption within organisation, please refer to Quantification
Methodologies: Energy and GHG Emissions.
82

Environmental Performance

Energy Consumption Outside of the Organisation
During 2015-16, ITC has expanded the upstream boundary of energy accounting. Accordingly
2731 TJ of energy consumed outside of the organisation has been accounted for during the year.
Energy Consumption

Exclusive Third
Party Manufacturers
(TPMs) catering to
notebooks
segment
Local road
Inbound
Outbound
of Education and
Employee travel by
transportation transportation Employee
Stationery Products
business
Hotels
of raw
of products commuting
Business;
travel by air Business
materials
and wastes
guests
2 exclusive TPMs of
Cigarettes Business;
ATC Limited (an
associate company)
For computation methodology, please refer to Annexure - Quantification Methodologies:
Energy and GHG Emissions.
The boundary of accounting will be progressively expanded in the years to come, based on
deepening of our engagement with the supply chain members.
With an objective to evaluate the impacts in the value chain and to identify additional areas
for improvement, ITC continued with the life-cycle assessment (LCA) studies for its products.
Having developed internal competencies in this area, life-cycle assessments of the products
from Personal Care Products Business and Paperboards & Specialty Papers Business were
carried out during the year which have helped in identifying areas for improvements in
packaging, energy & water use, etc.
Going forward, ITC intends to undertake more LCA studies for evaluating further
opportunities for optimisation in the value chain of its products and services.

The Road Ahead
Moving towards 50% renewable energy
share by 2020
1. Continuation of the management approach
in terms of
- Energy audits, benchmarking and
target setting for progressively
reducing specific energy consumption
(energy per unit of product/service).
- Investment in renewable energy assets
based on techno-commercial feasibility.
- Continuous monitoring and review
of performance through Integrated
Sustainability Data Management
System (ISDMS).

Addressing impacts in the Value Chain
1. Progressive accounting of energy footprint
of goods and services along the value chain
within the sustainability reporting boundary.
2. Maintain ITC’s status of 50% renewable
energy share with increasing reporting
boundary
- Engagement with supply chain
members for improvement of energy
performance.
3. Reduction of energy consumption in
transportation of raw materials, finished
goods and wastes.

2. Redesign of strategy if warranted according
to the dynamics of the economy.
Life-cycle assessment studies for identifying opportunities to minimise environmental
impacts across the value chain of products/services.
83

Air
Emissions
Management
Approach

water resources, Himalayan region, coastal
regions, health and disaster management
have been identified as focus areas in
addition to reduction in emissions intensity
The adverse impact on the environment due and increasing renewable energy share and
to air emissions is multifaceted and long- carbon sinks.
term. Evidence of the impacts due to climate
change caused by Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Recognising the fact that it is necessary to
emissions is already being witnessed in the play an active role in addressing the impacts
changing precipitation patterns across the due to climate change, ITC has focused on
globe including in India, thereby disrupting progressively improving specific energy
yields in primarily rain-fed Indian agriculture. consumption, reducing its dependence on
Since most of ITC’s businesses depend fossil fuels by increasing renewable energy
significantly on agri-inputs, disruption in share and enhancing sequestration of CO .
2
crop yields and consequent competition
for agricultural commodities, can have Another
aspect
linked
with
rapid
implications on ITC and its stakeholders. As industrialisation and urbanisation is the
per India’s Intended Nationally Determined problem of air pollution in terms of emissions
Contributions
(INDCs)
submitted
to of SO , NO and particulate matter that has
2
x
United Nations Framework Convention on become a very serious health issue across
Climate Change (UNFCCC), development almost the entire urban landscape of India.
programmes in sectors vulnerable to This not only has huge adverse impacts
climate change, particularly agriculture,
on health of human beings but also on the
84

Environmental Performance
biodiversity of a region. ITC has continued to
invest in reducing air emission levels through
focus on cleaner technologies/combustion
efficiency improvement while simultaneously
reducing specific energy consumption and
increasing ITC’s renewable energy share.

ITC has mapped the various challenges arising
from GHG and other air emissions that may
impact its own operations or its stakeholders
and implementing appropriate strategies
that are guided by Board approved policies
addressing the various dimensions involved.

Challenges from GHG and
other Air Emissions

ITC Strategy

Extreme weather events posing a major
threat to ITC properties in coastal areas
– disruption in operations, rail and road
traffic links, in turn affecting supply of
essential raw materials and finished goods.

Reinforcing the protection of our assets in
coastal areas.

Future regulatory pressures – carbon
tax or additional requirements under
the Perform, Achieve and Trade (PAT)
and Renewable Energy Certificate (REC),
in line with India’s commitments under
INDCs to UNFCCC.
Air pollution in terms of emissions of
SO2, NOx, particulate matter etc. from
combustion of fuels.
Severe changes in precipitation patterns
owing to climate change could significantly
disrupt rain-fed agriculture.
Disruption in crop yields leading to
increased competition for agricultural
commodities due to:
Adverse impact on water availability
in snow-fed rivers owing to retreating
glaciers
Increased
temperatures
productivity

impacting

Developing
appropriate
contingency
and insurance plans for uninterrupted
production and delivery, in situations of
extreme weather events.

ITC’s
Sustainability
Policies
providing
framework
for relevant
actions

Adopting a low carbon growth path – Target
of achieving 50% renewable energy share
by 2020.
Energy conservation through energy
audits,
benchmarking
and
target
setting for progressively reducing specific
energy consumption (energy per unit of
product/service).
Investment in renewable energy assets
based on techno-commercial feasibility.
Continuous monitoring and review of
performance through an organisation-wide
data management system.

Policy on
Life-cycle
Sustainability

Continued investment in reducing air
emission levels through adoption of
cleaner technologies/fuels, monitoring of
combustion efficiencies and investment
in state-of-the-art pollution control
equipment.

Policy on
Environment,
Health and
Safety

Ensuring the sustainability of agriculture
through integrated watershed development
and soil and moisture conservation
projects.

Policy on
Responsible
Sourcing

Evaluating
agricultural
productivity/
adaptation issues related to climate
change and providing support to farmers.
Enhancing GHG sequestration through
afforestation programmes.
Life-cycle based approach embedded in
the design and development of products
and services:
Progressive inclusion of performance
of supply chain partners within the
sustainability reporting boundary
Reduction of GHG emissions in
transportation of raw materials, finished
goods and wastes

Within Boundary

Beyond Boundary
85

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

ITC has mapped its climate change risks, their impacts & mitigation plans and also organisation specific opportunities,
as detailed below:
Risks from Climate Change

Energy
Regulation

For reduction of energy
as well as GHG emissions
intensity aligned with INDCs
to UNFCCC, regulatory
market-based instruments
in India like Renewable
Energy Certificate (RECs),
Renewable Purchase
Obligation (RPO) and
Perform Achieve and Trade
(PAT) mechanisms likely to
get more stringent.

Fuel/energy
taxes and
Regulations

Nationwide thrust for lowcarbon economic growth
expected to lead to an
increased carbon tax on
select energy intensive
industries and/or products
in order to incentivise energy
efficient production. The pulp
& paper sector likely to be
subjected to these taxes in
the near future.

Extreme
weather
events

Fluctuating
SocioEconomic
Conditions

86

Extreme weather events
posing a threat to ITC
properties that are in coastal
areas and possibly lead to
disruption in manufacturing
and logistics.

Socio-economic inequality
is one of the major risks
that plague the world today.
Increased difficulty in
achieving equitable growth
and development in a large
and diverse country like
India.
Coupled with huge disparity
in incomes and rising
irregularities, a period of
significant socio-economic
turbulence is foreseen.

Potential Impacts

Additional
investments
to improve
specific energy
and enhance
renewable
energy share.

Increase in
manufacturing
cost which could
lead to higher
product cost.

Disruptions in raw
materials supply,
production as
well as delivery
of product.

The low-income
section of
population would
be worst affected
by climate change
which may
further aggravate
the issue of
socio-economic
inequality.
Businesses having
dependence on
agriculture sector,
which is a source
of livelihood for
nearly half of the
population, may
face challenges
in their supply
chain.

Management Method

Adoption of a low carbon
growth path through
reduction in specific energy
consumption and enhancing
use of renewable energy
sources, while enlarging
positive carbon footprint
through increased carbon
sequestration.
Effective measurement,
recording and reporting
of relevant data in line
with Standard Operating
Procedures developed as per
International best practices.
Continuous monitoring
and review of performance
through organisation-wide
data management system.

Significant spends are made
regularly by the businesses
on strengthening measures
covering ITC manufacturing
units located in the
coastal areas.
Business continuity plans are
in place to compensate any
interruption of production by a
manufacturing facility due to
extreme weather events.
Belief that the performance
of business enterprises must
be measured in terms of the
value they create for society.
ITC’s development models
based upon the foundation of
its deep rooted stakeholder
centric approach, provide the
opportunity for generation of
sustainable livelihoods. Such
models unleash strong drivers
for achieving development with
social equity. With initiatives
like Sustainable Agriculture,
Soil & Moisture Conservation,
etc., ITC has been working to
develop climate-smart villages.
For details on ITC’s Social
Investments Programmes,
please refer ‘Mission Sunehra
Kal’ section of this Report.

Environmental Performance
Potential
Implications

Increasing awareness
towards climate change
to have an impact on
consumer behaviour drive for a product which
is not only cost effective
but also eco-friendly
across the supply chain.

Changing
Consumer
Behaviour

An opportunity to grow
businesses catering to
these demands by being
a pioneer in the field of
sustainability.

ITC’s Performance
on Greenhouse
Gases
Based on applicability, ITC has accounted
for the following gases in its GHG inventory:
Carbon Dioxide (CO2), Methane (CH4),
Nitrous Oxide (N2O), Hydrofluorocarbons
(HFCs), Perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and
Sulphur Hexafluoride (SF6). Provided below
is a comparison of ITC’s GHG inventory
for 2015-16 with that for 2014-15:

Management Method
Continue to expand our initiatives
towards sustainable growth
and maintain transparency in
disclosures.

Major clients
of our B2B
businesses like
Paperboards
and Specialty
Papers and Leaf
Tobacco already
seek disclosures
on sustainability
issues. Meeting
the customers’
requirements
and
expectations,
enhances the
brand value.

Developing products/services
that take into account the climate
change related parameters like
LEED® certification of all its Luxury
Hotels, FSC certified wood and ECF
technology for paper production.
Life-Cycle Assessment (LCA) studies
for selected products/services
to evaluate their environmental
impacts along the value chain and
take necessary steps to make our
products/services more benign to
the environment.

ITC has computed its greenhouse
gas (GHG) inventory, including GHG
emissions, biogenic carbon dioxide
(CO2) emissions and GHG removals,
in accordance with ISO 14064:2006,
which is the latest international
standard specifying principles and
requirements at the organisation
level for quantification and reporting
of GHG emissions and removals. The
2015-16 GHG inventory has been
verified by EY at the “Reasonable
Assurance” level.

4896

6000

5122

Opportunities from Climate Change

5000
4000

1476

1519
230

193

187

183

962

1000

860

1059

2000

1143

3000

0
Direct GHG
Emissions
(Scope 1)

2014-15

CO2 Emissions
Energy
from
Indirect GHG
combustion of Emissions
(Scope 2)
biomass
2015-16

Other
Indirect GHG
Emissions

Total GHG
Emissions

(excluding CO2
Emissions from
combustion of
biomass)

GHG
Removals

All above figures are rounded off and are in kilotonnes.
87

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Difference in GHG emissions between 2015-16 and 2014-15 are primarily attributable to the
following factors:
Decrease in Direct GHG (Scope 1) emissions
Decrease in fossil fuel utilisation due to increased availability of biomass as fuel in
the Paperboards and Specialty Papers Business (Please refer to “Energy” Section for
further details).
Increase in CO2 emissions from combustion of biomass
Increased utilisation of biomass as fuel in the Paperboards and Specialty Papers Business
Units and purchased steam generated from biomass in Pune Unit of Foods Business and
Bengaluru Unit of Cigarettes Business.
Increase in Energy Indirect GHG (Scope 2) emissions
Inclusion of additional Units/activities into the reporting boundary as detailed in “Energy”
section of this Report.
Increase in Other Indirect GHG (Scope 3) emissions
Inclusion of GHG emissions due to employee business travels by air, in the reporting
boundary.
Procurement of raw materials for Agri Business Division from distant geographies as per
the availability of materials with required quality.
ITC’s continual efforts in energy reduction and increasing renewable energy shares
across various Units have helped control GHG emissions. In 2015-16, 13,083 tonnes of
GHG emissions (Scope 1 & 2) were avoided by the implementation of energy conservation
measures leading to savings in both direct and indirect energy.

88

Environmental Performance

Carbon Positive

32,222 hectares
of plantations
added during
2015-16 under
Social and
Farm Forestry
Initiatives

Total plantations
as on March 31,
2016 at 2,25,293
hectares

51,21,855
tonnes of CO2
sequestered in
this year

ITC Carbon
Positive for 11
years in a row

GHG Emissions and CO2 Sequestration

6000
5122##
4896

#

4785

5000

4011*
3695

4000

4529#

4380
3690**

2638

3000

2025
2000

1013

1058

1202

1000
906
0

2046

1244 1143

1352

1572

311

1709

1564

1475

839

1613

742

1519

1476

860

962

2003- 2004- 2005- 2006- 2007- 2008- 2009- 2010- 2011- 2012- 2013- 2014- 201504
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
CO2e Emission (Scope 1, 2
& 3) in kilotonnes

CO2 Sequestered
in kilotonnes

CO2e Emissions from Combustion of Biomass
in kilotonnes (computed since 2012-13)

All above figures are rounded off
* Dip in CO2 sequestration in 2010-11 caused by reduced productivity of Eucalyptus plantations due to infestation in some areas and lesser
incremental addition of plantation area.
** Dip in CO2 sequestration numbers in 2012-13 is primarily due to the revision in methodology of computing CO2 sequestration in order to comply
with ISO 14064:2006 requirements.
Increase in CO2 sequestration in 2013-14 and 2014-15 is primarily due to increase in planted area of Subabul and Casurina species as compared
to the previous year.

#

Primary reason for the increase in CO2 sequestration in 2015-16 as compared to the previous year is increase in planted area of Eucalyptus and
inclusion of planted area of Poplar species.

##

Targets and Performance
In order to continually improve upon GHG emissions performance, some of ITC’s Businesses
have voluntarily set specific GHG emissions reduction targets at the Business/Unit levels.
89

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Since the three Units (Bhadrachalam, Kovai and Tribeni) of Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Business together accounts for around 79% of ITC’s total Scope 1 and 2 GHG emissions,
main focus has been directed at setting reduction targets for these Units on specific GHG
emissions (including Scope 1 and 2 emissions).
As explained in the table below, there has been a significant increase in utilisation of biomassbased fuels in Paperboards and Specialty Papers Units based on the market scenario during
2015-16, which had not been cognised for while setting the target for the year.
Specific GHG Emissions
(Scope 1 & 2)

Paperboards
and Specialty
Comparison Comparison
last
Papers
against target against
year
actual
Target
for
Actual
for
Actual
for
Business
2015-16
2015-16
2014-15
(TCO2e/T) (TCO2e/T) (TCO2e/T)

Bhadrachalam

1.56

1.53

1.43

6.5% lower

8.3%
decrease

Primary Factors

Increased
production of
in-house pulp to
reduce dependency
on imported pulp,
which led to 8%
increase in the
generation of black
liquor (a biomassbased fuel) and thus
reduce consumption
of coal.
Energy conservation
measures that have
contributed to
reduce the specific
energy consumption
by 2.5% (as
explained in ‘Energy’
section’).

Kovai

Tribeni

90

0.79

3.70

0.77

3.63

0.64

3.62

16.9% lower

0.3% lower

19.0%
decrease

Change in fuel
mix resulting
in an increase
in utilisation of
biomass-based fuels
(saw dust, de-oiled
bran and charcoal
from sustainable
sources) and
reduced dependency
on fossil fuel
(lignite).

2.2%
decrease

Energy conservation
measures that have
contributed to
reduce the specific
energy consumption
by 1.6%

Environmental Performance

Impacts in the Value Chain
ITC’s accounting of Scope 3 GHG emissions included monitoring and reporting of emissions
from sources as depicted below.
Scope 3 GHG Emissions

Inbound
transportation
of raw
materials

Outbound
transportation
of products
and wastes

Employee
commuting

Employee
business
travel by
air

Pick-up
and drop of
guests in
ITC Hotels

Exclusive Third Party manufactures
(TPMs)
Catering to notebooks segment of
Education and Stationery Products
business;
2 exclusive TPMs of Cigarettes
Business;
ATC Limited – an associate company

ITC’s efforts to optimise distribution logistics of finished goods for its FMCG Businesses have
helped control GHG emissions in 2015-16. Specific Scope 3 emissions due to transportation
of FMCG products (Cigarettes, Personal Care and Foods) in 2015-16 have reduced by around
24% (tonnes of CO2e emission/tonne of product transported) as compared to the previous
year for the same product categories. This has been achieved by improvement in vehicle
utilisation capacity and use of higher capacity vehicles across the supply chain and extensive
network de-layering in order to increase direct shipments to destination warehouses,
thereby avoiding intermediate movements.
The standards, methodologies, tools and assumptions used for quantification of the GHG
emissions and removals by various sources, have been explained at length in the Annexure
– Quantification Methodologies: Energy and GHG Emissions.

ITC’s Performance on Other Significant
Air Emissions
All ITC Units monitor significant air emission parameters, such as Particulate Matter
(PM), Nitrogen Oxides (NOx) and Sulphur Dioxide (SO2) on a regular basis to ensure
compliance with internal norms that are more stringent than regulatory requirements.
ITC’s Other Significant Air Emissions

1400
1200
1000
2014-15

800
600

Particulate
Matter (tonnes)

Nox (tonnes)

1239

920

843*

0

639

200

592

400

1033*

2015-16

SO2 (tonnes)

*NOx and SO2 emissions restated for 2014-15, due to an
error in computation of emissions
(i.e. emission values in ppm
not converted to mg/nm3) for
Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Unit at Kovai.

The increase in the total emissions over last year was primarily due to the increase in
production/service of Paperboards and Specialty Papers Business, Packaging and Printing
Business, Foods Business and ITC Hotels, and low grade quality of coal used for generation
of direct energy in Paperboards and Specialty Papers Unit at Tribeni.
91

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Snapshot of Bhadrachalam
Unit’s performance

0.8
0.6

(i) Particulate Matter

Particulate
matter
emission
for 0.4
Bhadrachalam has remained the same 0.2
0
(0.66 kg/BDMT of production) in 2015-16 as
compared to the previous year. As per the
Centre for Science & Environment (Source :
All About Paper – The life cycle of Indian Pulp
and Paper Industry, Green Rating Project,
2004), the average particulate emission by
large scale Indian Mills is 3.8kg/BDMT.

0.66

0.66

0.97

1

1.2
1

0.96

1.6
1.4

1.32

1.54

1.8

Owing to the energy conservation initiatives
undertaken as cited in the Energy section
in this Report, there has been a consistent
decrease in specific air emissions in terms
of particulate matter, NOx and SO2 emissions
for the Bhadrachalam Unit.

Particulate Matter
(in kg/BDMT of Production)
2009-10
2012-13
2015-16

2010-11
2013-14

2011-12
2014-15

(ii) NOx and SO2 Emissions
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0.79

0.74
0.61

0.6

0.53

0.51

0.58
0.46

Specific
NOX Emissions
(in kg/tonne)

0.36
0.35

0.33

0.33

Specific
SO2 Emissions
(in kg/tonne)

0.16
0.15
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
Standards for NOx (kg/tonne)

Standards for SO2 (kg/tonne)

Sweden

1.2-2.4

0.5-1.4

EU

1.0-1.8

0.1-0.5

EU-BAT*
Reported Values

1.0-1.5

0.2-0.4

0.73

0.157

CEPI* *

Sources - 1. Comprehensive Industry Document for Large-Scale Pulp & Paper Mills study by CPPRI, published by
CPCB, 2007
*EU-BAT: EU Norm Best Available technology

(iii) Hydrogen Sulphide Emissions
The primary source of hydrogen sulphide
emissions in the integrated pulp and paper
mill at Bhadrachalam is the soda recovery
boilers in which black liquor is used to
produce steam and recover chemicals. In
2015-16, hydrogen sulphide emissions for the
Unit have decreased by 24% in comparison to
2014-15 primarily due to improved operating
parameters and optimisation of equipment.
92

Hydrogen Sulphide

2. ** CEPI – Confederation of European Paper Industries (CEPI) Sustainability Report 2005 reported the average
specific SO2 and specific NOx values for European Paper Industries in 2002; CEPI Sustainability Report 2013
indicated the reduction in specific SO2 and NOx values for European Paper Industries from 2002 to 2012.

10
4.21
3.18
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

mg/nM

3

Regulatory Norm

2014-15

2015-16

Environmental Performance

Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS)
ITC’s ODS Phase-out Plan

Procurement of new
equipment which are free
of Chlorofluorocarbons
(CFC), Halons and Methyl
Chloroform (MCF)

Monitoring
and reducing
consumption
of ODS

Replacement of
all the existing
equipment using
ODS well before
the stipulated
phase-out period

Recovery of
all the ODS from
the equipment
being replaced for
recycling or safe
disposal

In 2015-16, the total consumption of ODS by all our Units was 90.1 kg of CFC-11 equivalent.

Responsible Management of Chemicals, Oils and Fuels
All ITC Units manage chemicals, oils and fuels as per norms defined by the Company,
which take into account all statutory requirements and international best practices.
These norms are taken into consideration right from the design stage and include
measures for leakage/spillage prevention, provisions for containment, impervious
flooring, leak detection system as well as all requirements as per Material Safety Data
Sheets (MSDS) for hazardous chemicals. To avoid any incidence of uncontrolled spills
or leakage, ITC has instituted safe work practices on handling and storage, procedures
for leak detection & spill control and preventive maintenance. The effectiveness of
these measures is checked on a regular basis.

The Road Ahead
Reduction in GHG Emissions

Reduction in Other Air Emissions

Impacts within Boundary
Moving towards 50% renewable energy share by 2020 by continuing with the
strategy of:
- Energy audits, benchmarking and target setting for progressively reducing
specific energy consumption (energy per unit of product/service)
- Investment in renewable energy assets based on techno-commercial feasibility
- Continuous monitoring and review of performance
- Representative projection of energy consumption scenario based on Company’s
growth plan and development of way-forward aligned with guidelines and
mandates defined by Government of India
Continue to focus on:
- Improvement of combustion efficiencies of fuels
- State-of-the-art pollution control equipment
Impacts in Value Chain
Continue to focus on optimising the logistics network to reduce the
environmental impacts due to transportation of raw materials, finished goods
and wastes
Enhancing CO2 sequestration through afforestation programmes, details on
which are provided in “Social Investments – Mission Sunehra Kal” section
Encouraging supply chain partners for reduction of GHG emissions
Life-cycle assessment studies for identifying opportunities to minimise
environmental impacts across the value chain of products/services
93

Water
Management
Management
Approach

from rainwater alone2, the agri-sector is
specially vulnerable to climate change, which
may lead to considerable adverse impacts
on agricultural yields. Agriculture being the
primary contributor to water consumption,
focused efforts must be made towards efficient
irrigation practices and bringing down the
overall water demand for this sector. On the
supply side, India’s water resources remain
constrained due to inefficient use of water,
overexploitation of ground water reserves
without adequate recharge and variations in
surface water availability because of erratic
rainfall patterns.

Global water requirements are projected to
exceed available sustainable water supplies
by 40% within 20301. The issue of water crisis
plagues large parts of the world including
Africa, parts of North America and Asia.
According to a 2030 Water Resources Group
Report1, in India, the aggregate gap between
demand and supply of water is expected to be
50% of the demand in 2030. Also, the report
projects that increasing population and rise
in demand for food/feed crops will lead to
ITC has sought to engage actively with multiple
agricultural demand doubling in comparison
agencies to share experiences and also
with 2005.
improve understanding of the complex social
It is important to note that in India agriculture and technical issues related to water. ITC has
which is largely rain-fed, accounts for around actively supported the development of the
three quarters of all water consumption India Water Tool as a working group member,
(surface and sub-surface) at the local an activity coordinated by the World Business
watershed level. With around 55% of net Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD).
sown area meeting its water requirements This tool permits a first level analysis of water
1
2

94

Charting our Water Future, Report by 2030 Water Resources Group, 2009
Prioritisation of rainfed areas in India, Planning Commission Report

Environmental Performance
risks across the country and maps water risk
for individual locations to prioritise sitespecific water-management improvements, an
issue that is becoming increasingly real in the
Indian context. ITC has been actively engaged
with the Alliance for Water Stewardship in
the development of the International Water
Stewardship Standard, which lays out the
framework for sustainable water management
and what it takes to achieve water
stewardship. Based on this understanding,
ITC had partnered with International Water
Management Institute (IWMI) to carry out a
water security study at the watershed level for

its Paperboards and Specialty Papers Business
Unit at Bhadrachalam. The recommendations
of the report are now being implemented in the
watershed area towards ensuring improved
water security for all stakeholders.
Learning from these experiences and its
extensive work on integrated watershed
development, ITC has evolved a long-term
strategy for water security at the local
watershed level for all stakeholders and
is in the process of doing the same for its
operating units located at identified high
water stress areas.

Challenges from Water Stress

ITC Strategy

With continuous decline in ground
water and uneven supply of surface
water, it may become even more
challenging for businesses to meet
their requirements.
Limits on water withdrawal exerting
pressure on industries to continually
reduce the water intake.

Conducting water audits, benchmarking
and implementation of best practices
for reducing water intake.
Progressively reducing specific
water intake (water per unit of
product/service) through continuous
monitoring of performance and
management
review
through
Integrated
Sustainability
Data
Management System (ISDMS).
Treating effluent so as to ensure
that discharge quality is better than
statutory requirements and progressing
towards recycling/reusing of all treated
effluent within or outside ITC premises.

Largely rain-fed farming in India,
with around 55% of net sown area
meeting its water requirements from
rainwater alone and agriculture
providing employment to over 48.9%
of the workforce.
Due to absence of adequate irrigation
infrastructure support, any significant
disruption in rainfall patterns resulting
from climate change may lead to
considerable adverse impacts on
agricultural yields.
Water availability especially critical for
ITC, as most of its businesses depend
significantly on agri-inputs.
Impact on water quality and availability
owing to disruptions in rainfall
patterns.
Declining groundwater tables due to
non-sustainable extraction against
increasing demand.
Deteriorating water quality requiring
additional treatment and additional
expenses before it can become usable.

Within Boundary

Evaluation of water availability/stress
across ITC Units.
Engagement with external stakeholders
for assessment and mitigation of water
related risks at the local watershed level.
Life-cycle
based
approach
for
understanding impacts across the
value chain.
Ensuring the sustainability of agriculture
through
integrated
watershed
development
including
rainwater
harvesting, soil and managed aquifer
recharge projects, moisture conservation
projects particularly in regions from
where ITC sources its raw materials.
Grassroot capacity building for proper
governance of water in agricultural
water usage.
Enhancing ITC’s water positive footprint
through rainwater harvesting, both
within our own Units and across different
watershed areas.
Responsible water stewardship actions
– working towards meeting the water
security needs of all stakeholders at the
local watershed level.

ITC’s
Sustainability
Policies
Addressing
these
Challenges

Policy on
Environment,
Health and
Safety
Policy on
Life-cycle
Sustainability
Policy on
Responsible
Sourcing

Beyond Boundary
95

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Our Performance
Water Withdrawal
In 2015-16, ITC Units withdrew 33.8 million
kilolitres (kl) of water, a decrease of 2% over
the previous year (34.48 million kl in 2014-15)
despite an increase in production for most
businesses. This performance is primarily
attributable to the on-going initiatives
undertaken towards water conservation
across ITC Units.

water intake of ITC, greater efforts have
been focused on the performance of the
Units (as given in the following section)
under this Business.
Total Water Intake of Paperboards
and Specialty Papers Business and
the Rest of ITC (in million kl)

3.63

Of the 33.8 million kl of total water
withdrawn, 77.8% of water resources were
sourced from rivers, 19.8% from ground
water sources and only 2.4% from municipal
and other water sources.
30.17

Sources of 33.8 million kl of Total Water
withdrawn by ITC in 2015-16

2.4%

PSPD

Rest of ITC

Total Water withdrawal in million kl
(PSPD Units)

19.8%
25.34

77.8%
1.14

0.02

Kovai

Bollaram +
Divisional
Head Office

3.68

Municipal water & Others
During the year, focused efforts by all
Units to reduce intake by conducting
water audits, benchmarking and adopting
leading practices facilitated the reduction
of specific water intake as illustrated in the
following sections.
In order to maintain its performance, ITC
Businesses have set voluntary specific
water intake reduction targets at the Unit/
Business level.
Considering the fact that three Units of
Paperboards and Specialty Papers Business
together accounted for around 89% of total
96

Tribeni

Ground water

Bhadrachalam

Surface water

Paperboards Unit at
Bhadrachalam
India’s largest integrated paper and
paperboards mill accounted for 75% of the
total fresh water intake in ITC. In 2015-16,
the Bhadrachalam Unit’s fresh water intake
was 41.4 kl/tonne of product, a reduction of
2.8% over the previous year’s 42.6 kl/tonne,
primarily due to various water conservation
initiatives undertaken by the Unit, which
include increased recycling of effluent in

Environmental Performance
process areas. The persistent efforts of the Unit towards water conservation are evident
in the consistently decreasing trend of specific water intake as depicted below. However,
specific water intake target for 2015-16 could not be achieved due to higher water
consumption in Paper Machine (#7) and less backwater utilisation in the Pulp Mill during
specific product category runs.
Proposed National Productivity Council (NPC) Benchmark Standard of 63 kl/tonne for large
scale integrated pulp and paper mills (Reference: Final Report on Development of Guidelines
for Water Conservation in Pulp and Paper Sector by NPC, New Delhi, March 2006.)
70

Specific water intake (in kl/tonne)

60

54.67

50.47

50

48.22

46.39

45.07

42.63

40.5

41.44

40
30
20
10
0
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 Target for 2015-16
2015-16

Specialty Papers Unit at Tribeni

Specific water intake (in kl/tonne)

ITC’s Unit at Tribeni manufactures specialty paper, which is a water intensive process. The
Unit has achieved around 23.6% reduction of specific water intake during the reporting
period over the previous year primarily due to process improvements, increased use of
recycled treated effluent for boiler make-up, cleaning, etc. The specific water intake target
for 2015-16 could not be achieved due to delay in execution of some water conservation
proposals like installation of second set of tertiary filtration for increased usage of treated
effluent, which would deliver the water saving benefits in the coming year.
140

116.59

124.24

115.88

107.76

114.55*

107.76

64.66

82.31

120
100
80
60
40
20
0

2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 Target for 2015-16
2015-16

*Increase of 6.3% in 2013-14 over the previous year was primarily due to
the commissioning activities of the new power plant at Tribeni.
Note: There is no specific NPC benchmark standard for Tribeni

97

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Paperboards Unit at Kovai
Water conservation measures including the arrest of losses in intake pipeline undertaken by
the Unit led to the reduction in specific water intake from 11.6kl/tonne in 2014-15 to 11.19
kl/tonne in 2015-16. The specific water intake target for 2015-16 could not be achieved due
to unforeseen machine stabilisation issues between September to November, 2015.
Proposed NPC Benchmark Standard of 19 kl/tonne for recycled fibre based paper mills
Specific water intake (in kl/tonne)

20
18
16

16.65

14
12

13.09

15.94

13.97

13.75
11.6

10
8

10.44

11.19

6
4
2
0

2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 Target for 2015-16
2015-16

Effluent Discharge
Treated Effluent Discharged by Destination
Municipal
Sewers
0.5%

Total volume of
24.45 million kl of
treated effluent was
discharged outside
the premises by
ITC Units

98

Surface
Water
Bodies
27.0%

Common
Effluent
Treatment
Plant 0.2%

Irrigation
outside
premises
72.3%

Environmental Performance
All ITC Units covered in the boundary of this Report met the regulatory requirements of
discharge quality and quantity in 2015-16. The two Paperboards and Specialty Papers Units
at Bhadrachalam and Tribeni accounted for 98.9% of total treated wastewater discharged
outside Unit premises in ITC, out of which 72.5% was utilised for irrigation purpose. Therefore
specific focus has been accorded to the performance of these 2 Units in terms of treated
effluent discharge volume as well as quality.
100
NPC benchmark standard** of 50 kl/tonne
for integrated pulp and paper industry

NPC benchmark standard absent for
Specialty Papers Industry

80

60

40

Bhadrachalam
2006-07

2007-08

2008-09

64.6

66.7

59.2

59.8

71.1

72.5

68.5

74.4

63.7

63.0

39.10

40.4

41.8

43.4

45.0

44.9

48.0

59.6

63.9

0

59.1

20

Tribeni

2009-10

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

2015-16

Bhadrachalam Unit has been reaping the benefits of initiatives undertaken towards recycling
of treated effluent as is evident from the continually decreasing trend of specific treated
effluent discharged. For Tribeni Unit, the specific treated effluent discharged has decreased
from 66.7 kl/tonne in 2014-15 to 64.6 kl/tonne in 2015-16.
Since 2010-11, the wastepaper-based pulp and paper mill at Kovai has not discharged any
treated effluent outside its premises.
The quality of the treated effluent from Paperboards and Specialty Papers Units was far
better than the stipulated standards in India:
Treated Effluent Quality:
Annual Average (2015-16) - Paperboards and Specialty Papers Units

Treated effluent quality (in mg/l)

250

157
104
22

42

30
4

6

41

32
8

BOD
Bhadrachalam

100

COD
Tribeni

Kovai

TSS
National Standard
99

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

In addition, the quality of the treated effluent from Bhadrachalam Unit was comparable
with European standards:

#

Parameters

Bhadrachalam (kg/tonne of
finished product)

European Paper Industries#
(kg/tonne of finished product)

BOD

0.87

0.816

COD

6.14

5.713

Reference: Confederation of European Paper Industries (CEPI) Sustainability Report 2005 and 2013.

The level of adsorbable organic halides (AOX) generated during the bleaching process is another
critical parameter applicable only to ITC’s Bhadrachalam Unit. These compounds are formed as
a result of reaction between residual lignin from wood fibres and chlorine compounds used for
bleaching. Depicted below is the specific AOX level for Bhadrachalam Unit for the year 2015-16
showing that the level is well below the norm stipulated by Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change (MoEFCC) as well as national and international benchmarks.

Reference

100

Specific AOX
Level (Kg/tonne
of finished
product)

Bhadrachalam Unit

0.0088

MoEFCC standard

1

Indian Paper/
Paperboard mills

Average as per Comprehensive Industry
Document for Large-Scale Paper Mills,
study conducted by Central Pulp and Paper
Research Institute, 2007

0.46-0.8

European Paper
Industries

Confederation of European Paper Industries
(CEPI) Sustainability Report 2005 reported
the average specific AOX value for European
Paper Industries in 2002; CEPI Sustainability
Report 2013 mentioned the reduction in
specific AOX value for European Paper
Industries from 2002 to 2012

0.019

International
Finance
Corporation (IFC)
Standard

‘Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines
Pulp and Paper Mills’, IFC

0.25

Environmental Performance

ITC is committed to achieving zero effluent
discharge through treating and recycling of
all wastewater. Along with this, harvesting of
rainwater within its properties not only reduces
water intake but also maximises groundwater
recharge and reduces run-off. In 2015-16,
the following Units achieved the goal of zero
effluent discharge outside the premises.
Cigarette Factories at Bengaluru,
Munger, Saharanpur & Pune, Leaf
Processing Units at Anaparti, Chirala
& Mysuru, Packaging & Printing Unit
at Tiruvottiyur and Munger, Snacks
and Noodles Unit at Malur and Pune,
Dairy Unit at Munger, Life Sciences
& Technology Centre at Bengaluru,
Research Centre at Rajahmundry,
Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Business Units at Kovai and Bollaram,
Personal Care Products Business Unit
at Manpura, Lifestyle Retailing Business
Headquarters at Manesar, ITC Green
Centre at Gurgaon, Hotels - ITC Maratha
and ITC Grand Central in Mumbai, ITC
Rajputana in Jaipur, ITC Grand Bharat in
Gurgaon and ITC Mughal in Agra.

Water Security in
Catchment Areas
With the intent of progressing towards water
stewardship, ITC had carried out a pilot water
security study at Bhadrachalam in order to
develop a comprehensive understanding of

issues involved. The study included basin
level water accounting & budgeting within
a defined catchment boundary, detailed
hydrogeological mapping covering the
use of ground water as well as surface
water resources, aquifer recharge, Mureru
river health restoration programme to
address basin level risks, etc. Based on the
recommendations of the study, a detailed
long-term plan has been drawn up to help
achieve water security for all stakeholders in
the catchment and appropriate interventions
at watershed level are being implemented
through the Social Investment Programme of
ITC. The study report is proposed to be shared
with government agencies for participative
implementation of recommendations with
key stakeholders.
ITC has also initiated work on water security
studies for two other river basins (Ghod river,
Maharashtra and Bhavani river, Tamil Nadu)
towards sustainable water stewardship. The
objective is to create an ecosystem with all
stakeholders being aware of the competing
demands and future risks of available
resources. The basin level security plan
would involve development of framework in
coordination with various stakeholders to
mitigate identified risks.
With the Bhadrachalam experience, similar
studies have been completed at ITC’s
two other Units located in water stressed
areas to help achieve water security for
all stakeholders in the catchment area.

ITC is committed
to achieving
zero effluent
discharge
through treating
and recycling of
all wastewater

101

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

The total
rainwater
harvesting
potential
created by ITC
so far is over
three times
the net water
consumption
by ITC’s
manufacturing
operations

The recommended interventions include
augmenting rainwater harvesting systems
in the catchment areas by measures like
rejuvenation of traditional cascading tanks
and village ponds, mapping of appropriate
recharge areas for the local aquifers,
community-level initiatives to promote
sustainable irrigation practices to reduce
water use, move to less-water intensive
crops without impacting the economic
benefits, etc. Phase-wise Implementation of
these interventions has been planned in the
subsequent years.
Going forward with learning from these
detailed studies, ITC intends to make
water security assessment an integral
part of greenfield/brownfield project
design and development.

Impacts in the Value Chain

more of them for evaluating opportunities
for improvement in the value chains of its
products and services.

Enlarging Water Positive
Footprint
The Company’s continued interventions in
rainwater harvesting both in the Company
premises and socially relevant watershed
areas have enlarged our water positive
footprint. Details on these interventions
are available in the “Social Investments –
Mission Sunehra Kal” section of this Report.
As on March 31, 2016, ITC’s Integrated
Watershed Development Projects, covering
2,59,050 hectares of land, support the
Water Positive status of the Company for the
14th year in a row. Due to focused efforts on
reducing net water consumption through
various water conservation initiatives
across the Businesses and increasing the
total rainwater harvesting potential created
within the Units and through watershed
development initiatives, the rainwater
harvesting potential created is now over
three times of the net water consumption by
ITC’s manufacturing operations.

In line with the Board approved Policies on
Life-cycle Sustainability and Responsible
Sourcing, in 2014-15, ITC had initiated the
process of accounting for water intake of
supply chain members. In 2015-16, the total
water intake for ATC Limited (an associate
Company), and two exclusive third party
manufacturers for the Cigarettes Business,
together was 28,801 kl. ITC has completed 6 For the watershed structures outside
LCA studies till date and intends to undertake ITC Units, the ‘RWH potential’ figures from
Water Balance

Million kl
30
25.84

25
19.6
20

23.59

25.63
19.93

20.6

19.89 21.05 21.47

28.18

23.27

16.06 16.86

15 12.74
10
5

9.49

8.44

0
2002
-03

2003
-04

8.54
5.43

4.62

2004
-05

2005
-06

6.21
2006
-07

Net water consumption (=Fresh
Water Intake - Treated Effluents
Discharged)
102

2007
-08

8.2

2008
-09

6.55

7.15

6.22

2009
-10

2010
-11

2011
-12

9.26

9.83

10.24

9.35

2012
-13

2013
-14

2014
-15

2015
-16

Total RWH potential created for the year (= RWH potential
created within ITC Units + RWH potential created through
watershed projects cumulative for that year)

Environmental Performance

2008-09 account for silt deposits - the adjustments are based on actual sample measurement
& the extent of silt deposit depends on the age & location of a structure.

The Road Ahead
While continuing its integrated watershed management programme, ITC will be guided by
the principles of water stewardship to ensure water security for all stakeholders across all
our operating Units.

Mitigation of Water Risks to
Own Operations

Addressing shared
water challenges in the
catchment

1. Identification of key
performance indicators
(KPIs) and setting targets
for continual improvement
based on internal as well as
external benchmarking.

1. Identification of water
security issues at the
local watershed level, to
be progressively made an
integral part of greenfield/
brownfield project design
and development.

2. Monitoring and review of
performance against KPIs
and targets set through
integrated sustainability
data management system.

2. Measures initiated to
achieve water security for
all stakeholders with review
and public reporting of
performance.

Ensuring that responsible
water stewardship actions
are taken to minimise
negative impacts and
maximise positive impacts
1. Continue to address water
security issues in regions
where ITC sources its agri
commodities from.
2. Integrated watershed
development and soil and
moisture conservation
projects in those regions.
3. Capacity building of farmers
to ensure self-sustenance
of the watershed
development programmes.
4. Expand coverage of
water security projects in
identified production units
exposed to water units.

Life-cycle assessment studies for evaluation of the opportunities for improvement in the
value chain of products/services and implement appropriate interventions.
103

Waste
Management
Management
Approach

water and air, which eventually has an adverse
effect on the quality of life. The recently notified
Solid Waste Management (SWM) Rules, 2016
and Plastic Waste Management (PWM) Rules,
Over the last few decades, the amount of 2016 come as an effort towards addressing
waste generated has gone up considerably as the issue of waste management, which has
a direct consequence of increasing population, assumed critical dimension in our country.
rapid & unplanned urbanisation and higher
consumption levels. Around 62 million1 tonnes As per several reputed studies, MSW typically
of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) is being consists of organic compostable matter
generated across urban India every year, (40% by weight), ash, stones & debris (40%),
with large metros such as Mumbai alone glass, paper, metals, textile & leather (13%)
generating over 7000 tonnes a day. However, and plastic wastes (7%). A 2016 Report by
we as a country are struggling to provide Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce
efficient waste management services and Industries (FICCI) on the Plastic Industry
and adequate infrastructure to attend states plastic consumption in India as 12.8
the increasing quantum of waste, with million tonnes per annum, which translates
continued and indiscriminate dumping of to generation of approximately 5 million
waste at open sites. While unavailability of tonnes of plastic wastes per annum. Plastics
recyclable/reusable waste adds burden on today are an integral part of modern life and
natural resources to meet the fresh demand, have made it possible for the benefits of
inappropriately managed waste dumped at development to reach the poorest and needy.
landfill sites also cause contamination on land, Their economic and environmental utility
1

104

Report of the Task Force on Waste to Energy, Planning Commission

Environmental Performance
in providing insulation benefits, protecting
product integrity when used as packaging,
etc. have been transformational and gaps
in the MSW management system should not
colour public perception about the utility of
plastics. Plastic wastes, although smaller in
overall composition, have tended to attract
greater public concern due to their visibility.
In most municipalities, contractors engaged in
collection and transportation are paid for the
volume of waste dumped at the landfill sites,
which in a sense incentivises landfilling and
discourages waste segregation.
PWM Rules 2016 adopt the concept of
Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) for
plastic packaging and Producers, Importers
and Brand Owners who introduce products
with plastic packaging in the market are now
responsible for working out a waste collection

system through their own distribution
channel or through the local body concerned.
ITC believes that the approach to address
the issue of collection, segregation and
management of plastic waste needs to be
integrated with the overall MSW management
system. Such an effort will avoid duplication
of systems not only between MSW and
plastic waste management streams but also
between different Producers, Importers
and Brand Owners, which, otherwise, will
significantly add to the existing challenges
of cost-effectiveness of MSW management
system. Also, in the Indian context, where
the unorganised sector has significant scale
and contributes to 2/3rd of the Fast Moving
Consumer Goods (FMCG) sector volumes of
post-consumer packaging, effectiveness of an
EPR approach modelled on an isolated waste

105

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

collection system is unlikely to be effective.
The key to success of a comprehensive MSW
management system is the ability to collect
and segregate different post-consumer waste
streams, which is fundamental to achieve
value realisation from each waste stream and
prevent littering/landfilling.

direct experience in MSW management as its
Well-being out of Waste (WOW) programme,
has been operating as a CSR initiative for
over a decade.

WOW initiative is focused on creating scalable
solutions to collect, segregate & recycle/
reuse different streams of municipal solid
waste, and providing sustainable livelihoods
Within the boundary of ITC Units, focused
for people working as rag pickers.
efforts are made towards resource
conservation by minimising waste generation Based on learning from own experience, ITC
and improving efficiencies in waste has crafted the following approach on the
segregation & recycling/reuse. ITC also has aspect of waste management.

Challenges of Waste Management

ITC Strategy

Waste generation from processes
affecting overall efficiency and
product competitiveness.

CREATING A POSITIVE
ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT

Inadequate
waste
segregation
at source, leading to inefficient
recoveries and more waste diverted
to landfills.

Reducing specific waste generation
at all ITC Units through constant
monitoring and improvement of
efficiencies in material utilisation.

Substituting multi-layer packaging
with alternative material while
ensuring similar insulation properties
and product shelf life.

Segregation at Source

Inadequate
infrastructure
and
unorganised waste collection processes.
Regulations on “extended producer
responsibility” related to generation and
management of plastic packaging waste.
Inadequate awareness and absence
of incentives/penalties necessary to
change behaviour of people to promote
reduce-reuse-recycle of waste.

Resource Conservation

Ensuring maximum reuse and recycling
of wastes by following ‘segregation at
source’ approach.
Towards 100% Recycling
Tracking of each category of waste to
ensure that it can be reused wherever
possible, and if not, recycled. This
ensures that almost no waste from
ITC’s Businesses lands up in municipal
or private landfills.
Use of Waste as Raw Materials
ITC’s Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Units are encouraged to increase the
utilisation of post-consumer waste as
a source of fibre instead of virgin fibre.
Research on Alternatives to Plastic
Packaging
Engagement with Central Institute of
Plastics Engineering and Technology
(CIPET) for research on options for
bio-degradable packaging material.
“WOW”: Well-being Out of Waste
Promote a clean and green
environment and create sustainable
livelihoods for rag pickers and waste
collectors, by developing a scalable
business model for post-consumer
waste recycling in collaboration with
local municipal corporations.

Within Boundary
106

ITC’s
Sustainability
Policies
Providing
Framework
for Relevant
Actions

Beyond Boundary

Policy on
Environment,
Health and
Safety
Policy on
Life-cycle
Sustainability
Policy on
Responsible
Sourcing
Corporate
Social
Responsibility
Policy

Environmental Performance

Our Performance
Waste Generation
In 2015-16, ITC Units generated 7,45,149 tonnes
of waste (7,91,227 tonnes in 2014-15). This
5.8% decrease in total waste generated over
last year was primarily due to use of coal with

low ash content, which led to reduction in fly
ash in Bhadrachalam Unit of the Paperboards
and Specialty Papers Division(PSPD). This Unit,
which accounted for 79.8% of the total waste
generated in ITC during 2015-16, reported
a decrease of 5.7% in waste generation as
compared to previous reporting period.

Business-wise break-up of wastes generated in ITC:

2015-16
Tonnes

2015-16
% of total waste

7,21,211

6,76,498

90.8

Leaf Tobacco

22,198

23,114

3.1

Packaging and
Printing

19,455

20,514

2.7

Foods

12,035

9,569

1.3

Cigarettes

9,417

8,554

1.1

Hotels

5,315

5,200

0.7

Personal Care
Products

1,335

1,347

0.2

263

353

0.1

7,91,227

7,45,149

Business
Paperboards and
Specialty Papers

Others*
Total

2014-15
Tonnes

* Includes ITC Head Office at Kolkata, ITC Infotech, ITC Green Centre at Gurgaon, Life Sciences & Technology Centre,
Lifestyle Retailing and Classic Golf & Country Club.
All of the above figures have been rounded off to the nearest digit

Contribution of PSPD Units in ITC’s Total Waste Generation

PSPD Bhadrachalam
Reduction in Specific Waste Generation
by 7.7% as compared to previous year
PSPD Tribeni
Reduction in Specific Waste Generation
by 18.5% as compared to previous year
PSPD Kovai
Increase in Specific Waste Generation by
19.3% as compared to previous year

9.6%

79.8%

3.4%
%

7.1

All Other ITC Units
107

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

In order to continually improve performance on resource conservation, all ITC Units have
developed systems to track and monitor the specific waste generation (waste generated per
unit of product/service). Considering the three Units of Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Business contributed around 90% of the total waste generated by ITC (given in the table below)
specific focus has been laid on monitoring the performance of these Units. Specific waste
generation of these Units are as follows:
Specific Waste Generation
(kg/tonne)
Unit

Comparison Comparison
against
against last
target
year

Reason

Actual
2014-15

Target
for
2015-16

Actual
2015-16

1,171.1

1,112.5

1,081.2

2.8%
decrease

7.7% lower

Availability of low
ash content coal.

Kovai#

210.2

199.7

250.8

25.6%
increase

19.3%
higher

Increased usage
of charcoal
resulting in higher
generation of ash.

Tribeni

2,055.6

1,952.84

1,674.7

14.2%

18.5%
lower

Availability of low
ash content coal.

Bhadrachalam

decrease

#
Normalisation of moisture content in ETP sludge and mixed plastic waste has been done, as significant difference
in moisture content over the last year was reported.

The significant variation in the specific waste generation as indicated above is primarily due
to the ash quantity owing to the availability of type of fuel for a particular Unit.
Specific Waste Generation of Bhadrachalam (kg/tonne of paper and paperboard)
Average generation of 1200 kg of solid waste per tonne of product
for similar integrated pulp and paper mills**

1400
1200
1000

1116

1127

1111

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

1030

1171

1044

1081

800
600
400
200
0
2009-10

2013-14

2014-15

Specific Waste Generation (kg/tonne of paper and paperboard)
**Reference: Centre for Science and Environment Report, ‘All About Paper’ (2004)

108

2015-16

Environmental Performance

Historically, due to limited options for recycling of lime sludge (a waste generated from
chemical recovery process in Bhadrachalam Unit), some amount was being utilised by
cement plants, with the major quantity stored in lagoons within the premises, incorporating
adequate precautions to prevent adverse impacts on soil and ground water. In 2014-15,
the Unit tied up with cement plants for disposal of lime sludge and post disposal of 14,000
tonnes through this arrangement, around 2.5 lakh tonnes of lime sludge was estimated
to be still accumulated in these lagoons. In 2015-16, another 67,000 tonnes of waste was
recycled through cement plants. The balance quantity in the lagoons is estimated to be
1.8 lakh tonnes and it is expected that the entire amount of accumulated lime sludge
will be disposed within the next 3 years. Similarly, around 4,900 tonnes of historically
generated mixed plastic waste, generated during pulp recovery from waste paper, was
stored in-house at Kovai Unit and was disposed to cement plants during the current
reporting period. As on date, there is no on-site storage of plastic waste and the Unit has
tied up with cement plants for all such plastic wastes generated in the Unit.

Segregation of Waste and its
Destination
Of the total waste generated by ITC in 201516, only 3.2% by weight can be categorised
as hazardous waste as per Indian statutes.
91.7% of this hazardous waste was recycled
by authorised external agencies, and the
balance 8.3% was disposed of or stored
completely in accordance with applicable
statutes. All ITC Units have established
systems and procedures to verify the relevant
authorisations and licenses of agencies
used for transporting, recycling or disposing
the hazardous wastes, in compliance with
applicable regulations and norms. Further,
Corporate EHS periodically verifies the
compliance in each of the ITC Units. During
2015-16, apart from hazardous wastes
transported to external treatment sites by
authorised transport agencies as applicable,

no other hazardous wastes were transported
between locations owned or managed by the
organisation.
The table below depicts the final destinations
of the total hazardous wastes generated
during 2015-16:
Total hazardous waste and its destination (2015-16)

Total hazardous waste generated
Hazardous waste carried over from
previous year and disposed in 2015-16

23,902
65

Recycled

21,981

Incineration + Landfill

1,944

On-site storage

42

(All values in Tonnes)

109

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Non-hazardous
waste category
Fly ash generated from
coal-fired boilers

Generated

Quantity of
generation (Tonnes)

Waste destination

Units of Paperboards & Specialty
Papers and Leaf Tobacco Businesses

3,40,836

Used by cement and
brick manufacturers

2,20,972

Utilised by in-house
lime kiln as well as by
cement manufacturers

Lime sludge

Bhadrachalam Unit of Paperboards &
Specialty Papers Business

Bottom ash from coalfired boilers

Units of Paperboards & Specialty
Papers and Leaf Tobacco Businesses

39,695

Used for brick
manufacturing and
filling of low-lying
areas

Wood waste from
chipping operation

Bhadrachalam Unit of Paperboards &
Specialty Papers Business

26,749

Used as a fuel in an inhouse boiler

During 2015-16, out of the total nonhazardous waste generated in ITC Units,
99.91% waste was reused/recycled. The
details of the destination for the major
waste categories, which contributed to
more than 85% of the total non-hazardous
waste generated in ITC Units in 2015-16,
are given above.

to eliminate the creation of waste in
the first place thereby reducing waste
generation. Since generation of waste
cannot be completely eliminated due to
limitations in processes and technology,
all ITC Businesses/Units endeavour to work
towards 100% recycling of generated waste.
‘Segregation at source’ along with focused
attention on identifying and tracking of all
Waste Recycling
waste streams till its final disposal have
ITC strives to maximise resource efficiency helped us to recycle 99.7% of the total waste
encouraging all its Units to take steps generated within the Units, during 2015-16.
Progress on Waste Recycling

98.9

98.8

99.8

99.8

99.9

99.8

99.9

99.8

99.7

600

94.0%

500

92.0%

200

353

579

300

490

400

748

96.0%

791

700

712

98.0%

682

800

663

100.0%

638

900

88.0%
86.0%
84.0%

100
0

82.0%
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
Total Waste Generation (kilo tonnes)

110

90.0%

Waste Recycling %

Environmental Performance
Units that recycled more than 99% of waste generated

Cigarette factories at Bengaluru,
Munger, Saharanpur, Kolkata and Pune.

Leaf Tobacco processing Units at
Anaparti, Chirala and Mysuru.

Paperboards and Specialty Papers Units
at Bhadrachalam, Kovai and Bollaram.

ILTD Divisional Head Office
in Guntur.

Personal Care Business Units at
Haridwar.

ITC Green Centre
at Gurgaon.

Foods Business Units at Haridwar
(Snacks, Noodles and Biscuits) and
Pune (Snacks and Noodles).

Hotels: ITC Maurya, ITC Maratha, ITC
Grand Central, ITC Grand Bharat, ITC
Windsor, ITC Gardenia, ITC Grand
Chola, ITC Sonar, ITC Rajputana, ITC
Kakatiya, My Fortune, Bengaluru and
WelcomHotel Sheraton, New Delhi.

Classic Golf & Country Club

Waste Used as Raw Materials

with utilisation of externally generated
waste paper as a source of fibre in the above
mentioned Paperboards and Specialty
Paper Units, have helped the company to
maintain its solid waste recycling positive
status for the 9th consecutive year (refer to
the table below).

To further expand the Company’s waste
recycling footprint, the Paperboards
and Specialty Paper Units at Kovai and
Bhadrachalam use post-consumer waste
as raw materials. Efforts at ITC Units to
recycle the entire waste generated along
2007
-08
Total Waste
generated
(tonnes)

2008
-09

2009
-10

2010
-11

2011
-12

2012
-13

2013
-14

2014
-15

2015
-16

3,52,970 4,90,180 5,78,865 6,38,405 6,63,796 6,82,405 7,11,887 7,91,227 7,45,149#

Waste recycled
3,49,264 4,84,287 5,77,766 6,37,452 6,62,978 6,81,129 7,11,033 7,89,720 7,42,635
(tonnes)
% Recycled

98.90

98.80

99.80

99.80

99.90

99.80

99.90

99.80

99.70

Un-recycled
waste (tonnes)

3,706

5,893

1,099

953

818

1,276

854

1,592

2,606

External
wastes used as
raw materials
(tonnes)
Waste
recycling
footprint (%) *

1,63,245 1,25,337 1,25,931 1,19,002 1,15,414 1,18,462 1,09,998 1,14,563 1,13,213

145

124

122

119

117

117

115

114

115

92 tonnes of waste, carried over from previous year was disposed in 2015-16 but not included in ‘total waste generated’
* Waste Recycling footprint (%) = (Waste recycled + external waste used as raw material) *100 /Total waste generated in ITC
#

111

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

The Wellbeing out of
waste (WOW)
movement today
extends to 400
municipal wards
of Hyderabad,
Chennai,
Bengaluru,
Coimbatore and
some towns
of Telangana
covering over 5
million citizens

ITC has also been collaborating with local
municipal agencies to work on sustainable
management of community waste. “Wealth
Out of Waste (WOW)”, a recycling programme
initiated in April 2007 by the Paperboards and
Specialty Papers Business of ITC, has evolved
into a corporate level programme with scope
enhanced to “Well-being out of waste”.
The WOW movement today extends to 400
municipal wards of Hyderabad, Chennai,
Bengaluru, Coimbatore and some towns of
Telangana covering over 5 million citizens
and now manages municipal solid wastes for
over 11,00,000 households. The Programme
creates sustainable livelihood for 10,000 rag
pickers and waste collectors by propagating
source segregation at each of the households.
Similar programmes are operational in 9
districts of Saharanpur, Hooghly, Kolkata,
Munger, Guntur, Madurai, Pune, Thiruvallur
and Haridwar also. The primary focus is on
door-to-door collection of household waste,
segregation at site in order to re-cycle and
minimise the load at municipal landfills.

The Road Ahead
In context of PWM Rules 2016 and the adopted
concept of EPR on plastic packaging, Industry
has a critical role to play in providing a holistic
solution to MSW management. An effective
EPR model needs to be complemented
with a national level accounting of plastic
packaging introduced into the market by a
Producer, Importer or Brand Owner, against
which the integrated MSW and plastic
waste management programmes should be
rolled out to off-set the plastic packaging
used against the plastic wastes recycled or
used for energy recovery as per approved
methodologies, in a phased manner.
With learning from our direct experience
on MSW management, we strongly believe
that the following elements are essential
for a comprehensive solution to MSW
management:
a)

Waste from Supply
Chain
ITC intends to continually expand its coverage
and include its supply chain members into
the reporting boundary. With this intent, ITC
started accounting for the waste generated
from the operations of exclusive third party
manufacturing (TPM) Units catering to the b)
notebook segment of ITC’s Education and
Stationery Product Business as well as
ATC Limited, ITC’s associate Company from
2013-14. TPM Units for Cigarettes Business
have also been included in the reporting
boundary from the year 2014-15. Performance
of these Units is detailed below.

A significant portion of plastic wastes in
India constitute multi-layered laminates
and light weight plastics, which represent
the visible part of plastic wastes getting
littered or ending up in landfills, as low
realisation from these categories of
plastics do not make it viable for waste
pickers to collect and segregate them.

Total Waste Generated
(in tonnes)

% Recycled

Exclusive TPM Units for
Notebook segment

2798

87.1

Exclusive TPM Units for
Cigarettes Business

1174

99.9

ATC Limited

1297

99.9

Supply Chain Members

112

Public-Private
Partnership
(PPP)
programmes on MSW management
should be rolled out across the country,
initially in urban centres, that integrates
MSW and plastic wastes management.
These PPPs must be driven to primarily
meet the interests of the unorganised
waste
picker
communities
and
all incomes generated should be
channelised towards betterment of their
livelihoods.

Environmental Performance

c)

Energy recovery from these plastic d) Land, transportation and other
wastes can be achieved by using them
infrastructure support should be
as an alternative fuel (replacing coal/
provided by Urban Local Bodies for
coke) in sectors such as the cement,
collection, sorting and pre-processing of
steel and power. While use in the cement
different waste categories.
sector is an established practice, this
e) Behavioural change at the individual
end-of-life treatment option will become
waste generator level for waste
financially viable and sustainable only
segregation at source requires sustained
when these plastic wastes also obtain
engagement and regulatory backing.
value realisation based on their quality
While Industry can facilitate setting up of
and calorific value.
MSW management systems through capacity
Wet organic waste should be processed
building, knowledge sharing and initial setfor production of bio-gas, with manure
up support, the system itself must operate
as a by-product. By and large, municipal
on a business for profit model, with all value
wet organic waste in India remains
created going to the stakeholders running
under-exploited barring some isolated
the system. In our opinion, financial viability
small scale efforts at composting or
of integrated MSW and plastic wastes
gasification. We are convinced that the
management models is what will drive its
technology for large scale gasification
uptake across the country and determine its
of these wastes for conversion to fuel
scalability.
is matured and the business model is
viable. Solid residues, post gasification ITC is fine-tuning its strategy for tackling the
of wet organic wastes also serve as issue of post-consumer waste management
manure which creates one more potential through collaboration with government,
revenue stream, thereby improving municipal corporations, NGOs, communities
financial viability and independence of and other stakeholders within a boundary
where significant influence can be exercised.
the integrated model.

1

Focus on waste collection and segregation at source

2

Financial viability of MSW management model

Public-Private Partnership (PPP) programs for integrated MSW management

Responsible advocacy for
-

Encouraging usage of multi-layered plastic/light-weight plastic waste
in industries where it can be used as an alternate fuel for cement
manufacturing, etc

-

Awareness creation through industry associations

3

Mass Awareness Programmes

4

Research and Development (R&D)

5

Life Cycle Assessment

Leading campaigns to educate and encourage waste generators and other
stakeholders (e.g. waste pickers) on source segregation

Investment in R&D and implementation in pilot projects for recycling
technologies of multi-layered plastic packaging waste

LCA studies for identified products/services to evaluate the opportunities
for improvement and enhance the resource efficiency in value chain
113

Raw
Materials
Management
Approach
All ITC Units continue to pursue efficient
use of raw materials through focused efforts
on waste elimination/reduction. Moreover,
as most of ITC’s Businesses are vertically
integrated, this provides the Company
unique opportunities for exercising greater
control over optimum utilisation of raw
materials, recycling/reuse of wastes as well
as efficient logistics.
For addressing the impacts outside
the boundary of operations, life-cycle
assessment study of ITC’s products are
progressively being taken up with the
objective of making such studies an integral
part of product design and development.
In addition, Board approved policies of ITC
supplemented by a ‘Code of Conduct for
Vendors and Service providers’ provide
114

the direction for sustainable sourcing of
raw materials to ensure their long-term
availability. Please refer to “Supply Chain”
section of this Report for further details.

Environmental Performance

Challenges from Materials
Sustainability

ITC Strategy

Increased competition for resources,
technology barriers, need for capital
investments and maintaining cost
competitiveness.

Maximise resource use efficiency
through rigorous process controls.

Due to absence of adequate
infrastructural support, any significant
disruption in rainfall patterns resulting
from climate change may lead to
considerable adverse impacts on
agricultural yields.
Climate change aggravates the risks of
low productivity of agricultural sector
of India, impacting sustainability of
agri based businesses.
Focusing on long-term sustainability
goals while operating in an environment
where both market dynamics as well as
regulatory framework are focused on
the short-term.
Low productivity as an outcome of
increasingly small farm-plot holdings,
inadequate access of farmers to
knowledge and technology.
Agricultural
procurement
and
sourcing policies in India come from
a controlled market philosophy
shaped by circumstances of postindependent India. For a new India,
where agri-productivity has to be
maximised while also ensuring social
equity, a new framework of laws and
regulations is necessary.

Life-cycle
assessment
studies
for identifying broad areas for
improvements and expand these
studies to all other products and
services (Please refer to “Supply
Chain” section of this Report for
further details).
Ensuring
the
sustainability
of
agriculture
through
integrated
watershed development projects
including rainwater harvesting and soil
and moisture conservation projects
particularly in regions where ITC
sources its raw materials from.
Grassroots capacity building for proper
governance in agricultural water
usage, self-sustenance of integrated
watershed development programmes,
infrastructure
improvement
etc.
(Please refer to “Social Investments –
Mission Sunehra Kal” of this Report for
further details).
ITC, through industry associations, and
other appropriate forums engages with
policy makers to discuss these issues.

ITC’s
Sustainability
Policies
providing
framework
for relevant
sections

Policy on
Environment,
Health and
Safety
Policy on
Life-cycle
Sustainability
Policy on
Responsible
Sourcing

Furthermore, absence of crop and
weather insurance reduce the risktaking capability of the small farmers
for investment in infrastructure
improvement.

Within Boundary

Beyond Boundary

ITC’s Performance
ITC’s products and services can be broadly
classified into the following categories:
1. FMCG (B to C) PRODUCTS
Cigarettes, Branded Packaged Foods,
Personal
Care
Products,
Education
and
Stationery
Products,
Matches
and Agarbattis.
2. INDUSTRIAL SUPPLIES AND EXPORTS
Paper, Paperboards,
Tobacco, etc.

Packaging,

3. SERVICES
Hoteliering and Information Technology.

Flow of materials into ITC
As explained in ‘Supply Chain’ section, most
of the ITC Businesses largely depend on agrobased raw materials. In 2015-16, ITC processed
20,52,892 tonnes of materials, out of which
95.3% (19,56,089 tonnes) were from renewable
sources like agriculture and forestry.

Leaf The Paperboard and Specialty Papers
Business contributes to over 80% of the total
115

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Approximately
74% of the fibre
produced in
Bhadrachalam
is from wood
sourced from
ITC’s Social and
Farm Forestry
Initiatives

raw materials procured by ITC. 16,47,645
tonnes of materials were processed by the
Paperboard and Specialty Papers Business
in 2015-16, out of which 99.6% were
renewable. Leaf Tobacco and Agri Business
Divisions which together account for around
10% of total raw materials procured by
ITC, processed 1,96,278 tonnes of raw
materials in 2015-16 and all of these raw
materials were renewable in nature. Foods
Business processed 1,44,836 tonnes of raw
materials (7% of ITC’s total raw materials)
out of which 81.3% were renewable. In the
above analysis, only those raw materials
have been considered which constitute
more than 10% of the total, consumed in
any manufacturing Unit or have significant
environmental importance.
ITC’s initiatives in promoting sustainable
practices in its supply chain have been
detailed out in “Social Investments: Mission
Sunehra Kal” and “Supply Chain” sections of
this Report.

Responsible Sourcing of
Wood Fibre

wood remains a critical challenge and is a
serious sustainability concern, especially in
a country with limited natural resources and
acute income inequities.
Approximately 53% of the total fibre
requirements of ITC’s Paperboards and
Specialty Papers Division (PSPD) is met by
pulp manufactured at Bhadrachalam, another
19% comes from recycled fibre, processed at
Kovai and Bhadrachalam and the balance
28% is imported pulp used at Bhadrachalam
and Tribeni Units. Approximately 74% of the
fibre produced in Bhadrachalam is from wood
sourced from ITC’s Social and Farm Forestry
Initiatives. All the fibre used for operations at
the Kovai Unit is either recycled/reclaimed
fibre. 100% of the fibre used by ITC PSPD is
of known and legal origin.
High yielding, site specific, disease resistant
eucalyptus and subabul clones have been
developed by in-house R&D. ITC distributed
132.21 million high quality saplings to
farmers which resulted in increasing the
area under social and farm forestry by 32,222
hectares in 2015-16.

Wood is a major source of fibre for the paper Apart from the obvious benefits of increasing
and paperboards industry. Availability of the green cover, plantation on degraded

116

Environmental Performance

wastelands under the Social Forestry
Programme also directly contributes to in
situ moisture conservation, ground water
recharge and significant reduction in
topsoil losses caused by wind and water
erosion. In addition as a result of leaf litter
from multi-species plantations and the
promotion of leguminous intercrops, soils
are constantly enriched.

respected certification amongst forest
product certification schemes. ITC PSPD
can supply FSC certified paper/paperboard
from all its four manufacturing Units, i.e.
Bhadrachalam, Kovai, Tribeni and Bollaram.
The FSCTM logo on the product assures
customers that the material is from legal,
sustainable and well managed sources.

FSCTM certification for ITC PSPD illustrates
Forest Stewardship Council
the organisation’s continued commitment
Certifications
to sustainable business practices and to the
building of an inclusive and secure future
Further consolidating ITC’s Triple Bottom for its stakeholders and the society at large.
Line performance, ITC PSPD achieved the The business is the largest seller of FSCTM
prestigious Forest Stewardship CouncilTM certified grades of paperboards and paper in
(FSCTM) Chain of Custody Certification in the country.
2009, which is valid till 2020. To ensure
responsible wood, all domestic wood
procurement sources have been certified
as per standards of FSC TM - Controlled
Wood and nearly 30,000 hectares have In the coming years, ITC plans to carry
been covered under the FSCTM - Forest out more life-cycle assessment studies
of products/services to evaluate the
Management Certification.
environmental
impact
at
various
TM
life-cycle
stages,
which
would
help
in
FSC is an independent, non-governmental,
not-for-profit organisation established to identifying opportunities for further
promote the responsible management of the improving their environmental attributes.
world’s forests and is recognised as the gold In line with the Board approved Policies
Life-Cycle
Sustainability
and
standard in wood certification for ethical on
and legal sourcing. The FSCTM is represented Responsible Sourcing, formal systems
in more than 107 countries around the and procedures will be progressively
world and is the most widely accepted and implemented across ITC Businesses.
TM

The Road Ahead

ITC is the largest
seller of FSCTM
certified grades
of paperboards
and paper in the
country

117

Biodiversity
Management
Approach

The long-term sustainability of ITC’s agribusinesses depends on natural capital,
which includes land, underground and
surface water and biodiversity. A ‘sustainable
agriculture area’ incorporates ecological and
biodiversity concerns and supports livelihood
improvements. ITC has, accordingly, taken
up biodiversity conservation as a major
intervention in its operational areas through
various initiatives. This will not only preserve
the nation’s rich biodiversity, but also ensure
a sustainable future for communities residing
in the Company’s catchment areas.

Given the essential ecosystem services
that nature provides, especially to rural
households, ITC recognises that the
preservation and nurture of biodiversity is
crucial for the long-term sustainability of
farming communities. In agro-ecosystems,
biodiversity provides varied ecosystem
services including recycling of nutrients,
control of local micro-climate, regulation of
local hydrological processes, regulation of
the abundance of undesirable organisms,
and detoxification of noxious chemicals.
Decoupling of agro-ecosystems from
ecosystem services rendered by biodiversity
may result in overdependence on external
inputs and ever-increasing economic and
environmental costs, as well as impacting ITC has successfully implemented the
nutrition and health of consumers at various programme to establish biodiversity
trophic levels.
conservation plots in the process of Natural

Biodiversity
Conservation Progress

118

Environmental Performance
Resources Management to enhance floral
and faunal biodiversity as well as ensure
adequate livelihood and employment
generation to local communities. The
objective of the programme has been
to motivate the communities to make
productive use of degraded common lands
through biodiversity conservation. Till now,
under this programme, ITC has developed
139 biodiversity plots involving farmers and
community members covering a total area
of 3,942 hectares in 14 districts. The initiative
has also helped in conserving thousands
of species of flora and fauna, including
birds, butterflies, reptiles and amphibians.
Regular biodiversity indexing is also being
carried out in biodiversity conservation
plots, to measure the extent of success of
the programme in terms of enhancing the
species diversity and dominance.

by our Agri Business across our crop growing
regions covering Karnataka (Mysuru district)
and Andhra Pradesh (West Godavari,
Prakasam and Guntur district). Over the
past two years, it has helped the Business in
building strategy and action plans to embed
biodiversity conservation in agriculture
practices. The BROA tool provides a method
to identify impacts and dependencies of
business operations on biodiversity of a
given agricultural landscape, followed by
an assessment of the various risks and
opportunities that emerge, based on which
plans are made and actions undertaken to
address them.

ITC recognises
that the
preservation
and nurture
of biodiversity
is crucial for
the long-term
sustainability
of farming
communities.

The Division’s aim on biodiversity
management is on embedding biodiversity
conservation across its business value
chain and helping the farmers to adopt
best agricultural practices for sustainable
agriculture. For us the focus is not just
on species conservation for addressing
biodiversity concerns, but the identification
of any potential negative impact on
ecosystem services and mitigate them
The Biodiversity Risk and Opportunity in agriculture. Following from this, the
Assessment (BROA), is being implemented following key initiatives were implemented

Biodiversity
Conservation in
Agriculture

119

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

by the Division in 2015 towards biodiversity
conservation in agriculture practices.

centres are scientifically disposed and
safely incinerated at the state pollution
approved facilities.

Soil Conservation: The Business provides
inputs to farmers on sustainable
agriculture techniques that address
physical, chemical and biological
health of the soil in order to protect
valuable soil resources. In 2015 around
7,000 hectares was covered under soil
conservation programme covering the
states of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Apart from biodiversity conservation in
Telangana and Rajasthan.
selected plots, ITC has embarked on a
watershed level biodiversity conservation
Water Conservation: Drip irrigation was
aimed at improving biodiversity in a larger
implemented in 700 hectares of land in
area. Assessment of current status and
Andhra Pradesh covering tobacco and
plans for improvement was completed in
chilli crop, saving almost 900 million litres
Ravandoor tank cascade of Mysore district
of water.
which is spread over 2,300 hectares. This
Toxic Waste Management to Protect assessment was done by Kalpataruvu, a
Ecosystem: Farmers were educated on non-profit organisation with technical
safe disposal of empty pesticide containers support from University of Agriculture and
by setting up toxic waste collection Horticulture Shivmogga, Karnataka. Based
centres in villages. In 2015 the Company on the study recommendations, a biodiversity
had established around 70 toxic waste conservation action plan was initiated and
collection centres in 70 villages (Andhra work was completed in 130 hectares. This
Pradesh and Karnataka) by involving work included activities such as large scale
local community, village panchayat and awareness generation and community
farmers. The toxic wastes collected in the participation, protection and conservation

Mainstreaming
Biodiversity
Conservation at
landscape level

Apart from
biodiversity
conservation
in selected
plots, ITC has
embarked on a
watershed level
biodiversity
conservation
aimed at
improving
biodiversity in a
larger area

120

Environmental Performance
of existing old trees in the area, plantation of
native species on farm-field bunds and in-situ
conservation of commons. Similar studies
have been initiated in Nanjanayakanahalli
and Kothegala cascades in the same district
spread over across 4,000 hectares area.

1

In agro-ecosystems, biodiversity performs varied
ecosystem services including recycling of nutrients, control
of local microclimate, regulation of local hydrological
processes, regulation of the abundance of undesirable
organisms, and detoxification of noxious chemicals

Going forward, ITC will partner with
International Union of Conservation
of Nature (IUCN) in Munger district of
Bihar aimed at restoration of ecosystem
services for the benefit of agriculture
through biodiversity conservation. As part
of the collaboration, IUCN will develop
an Agriscape Tool, which will enable
understanding of the status of natural
landscape around farms and ecosystem
services being provided. This will enable the
program to design suitable interventions to
promote crop productivity, simultaneously
maintaining farm productivity, soil fertility
as well as various other ecosystem
services1. The analysis undertaken will help
in identifying the missing links/gaps in
important ecosystem services identified for
agriculture and allied livelihoods.
1
In agro-ecosystems, biodiversity performs varied ecosystem services including recycling of nutrients, control of local microclimate, regulation
of local hydrological processes, regulation of the abundance of undesirable organisms, and detoxification of noxious chemicals

121

Social
Performance

122

Social Performance

Labour Practices &
Decent Work and
Human Rights
Occupational Health
& Safety
ITC’s Mission Sunehra
Kal for Sustainable
& Inclusive Growth
Product Responsibility

123

Labour Practices &
Decent Work and
Human Rights
Management
Approach
ITC is committed
to conducting
business in
accordance
with the
highest ethical
standards. It
expects its
employees
and business
partners to
subscribe and
adhere to this
philosophy

124

ITC operates in a diversified, ever-changing,
highly competitive global landscape.
This necessitates the development
of a strong, customer responsive
world-class enterprise premised on a
commitment to employee well-being
that goes beyond just conforming with
relevant local laws to incorporating the
best of global standards.

Objectives
The Company’s primary objectives in this
area for the next five years are to ensure that:
All ITC’s operational units are and will
continue to remain fully compliant with
the Company’s Policies, premised on a
zero tolerance guiding principle towards
violations in this regard.
All investment decisions will integrate
Human Rights and Decent Labour
Practices considerations into the
decision-making process.

ITC is committed to conducting business
in accordance with the highest ethical
All ITC’s Business partners and supply
standards. It expects its employees
chain members will follow and adhere
and business partners to subscribe and
to the Human Rights Policies that the
adhere to this philosophy, which honours
Company upholds.
all pertinent laws and upholds the spirit
of human rights as enshrined in existing Accordingly, the Company has put in place
international standards.
Board approved Policies covering crucial

Social Performance
aspects of employee engagement and
human rights.

Implementation
All ITC Units have instituted appropriate
systems and processes to ensure
compliance with these Policies and with
statutory provisions, including processes
to redress grievances. The implementation
of these Policies is ensured by Divisional/
Strategic Business Unit Chief Executives,
through members of the respective
Management Committees. Compliance
is regularly monitored and evaluated by
the Sustainability Compliance Review
Committee (SCRC). The report of the SCRC
is reviewed by the Corporate Management
Committee every quarter.

Building Business
Leaders
The
Company’s
talent
management
programme strives to deliver its promise
of ‘Building Winning Businesses. Building
Business Leaders. Creating Value for India.’
ITC is guided by a holistic approach centred on
multiple elements rather than on individual
elements that impact talent. These include
talent sourcing, work design, performance
management and remuneration, individual
growth and development, as they relate to
talent management.

Leadership development is considered
integral to talent management. ITC’s
‘strategy of organisation’ – creating
multiple drivers of growth through a diverse
Outcomes
portfolio of businesses, each with its own
independent leadership team – serves as
ITC’s commitment to its employees and their an excellent platform to build distributed
well-being is reflected in its compliance with business leadership. An equally important
all its stated Policies, as demonstrated by the dimension of building leadership is ITC’s
performance data presented in this section. strategic learning and development agenda.

Human Resource
Strategy

ITC has made significant investments in
enhancing the organisation’s recruitment
and selection skills and performance
management processes, which will positively
In order to sustain its position as one of impact its talent management programme.
India’s most valuable corporations, ITC
remains relentlessly customer-focused,
competition-differentiated, performancedriven and future-capable. A vital Awareness & Sensitisation
element in preparing ITC for the future
is to build today’s capabilities to enable Specific actions were undertaken during
the best response to tomorrow’s market the year to ensure compliance with Policies
opportunities. Five capability platforms on human rights and labour practices.
relevant to making businesses future These include:
ready have been identified – Strategic,
Value Chain, Leadership, Innovation and
Sensitisation training on ITC’s approach
Human Resources Development. These
to Human Rights and on Prevention of
platforms are also designed to strengthen
Sexual Harassment at the Workplace was
organisational systems to facilitate speedy
undertaken and covered 183 employees
across businesses as well as 77 members
and competitively superior responses to
of Internal Complaints Committees
market opportunities.
that have been constituted in line with
ITC follows two approaches to build critical
The Sexual Harrassment of Women at
capabilities in these identified areas. The
Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and
first is to energise the organisation for
Redressal) Act, 2013.
change by building capability in its people
Roll-out of the Grievance Redressal
through information, knowledge and skills.
Procedure for all managers and office
The second is to guide continuous learning
associates in ITC’s Businesses and
and performance improvement in all
Corporate Head Office.
functions and businesses.

Performance

Five capability
platforms
relevant
to making
businesses
future ready
have been
identified
– Strategic,
Value Chain,
Leadership,
Innovation
and Human
Resources
Development

125

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

ITC’s approach
focuses on
creating a
conducive work
environment
that combines
the need
to focus on
performance
and results with
a caring and
compassionate
work ethos to
deliver winning
performance

126

Awareness building among vendors and work for any reason whatsoever in any of
service providers through the introduction ITC’s Units.
of ITC’s Code of Conduct on this aspect,
which has been accepted by identified Employee Well-being
vendors/service providers.
Nurturing quality talent and caring for the
well-being of its employees are integral
Employees
to ITC’s work culture. The organisation’s
During the year under Report, the number approach focuses on creating a conducive
of full-time direct employees was 32,138 of work environment that combines the need
which 1,581 employees in the Leaf Tobacco to focus on performance and results with
Business were engaged on a seasonal a caring and compassionate work ethos to
basis due to the nature of the business. deliver winning performance. The health of
Of the total number of employees, 3,490 its employees is a vital area of concern for
were women. The number of new appointees ITC and periodic preventive health checkfor the reporting period was 5,884 of which ups/medical camps, awareness programmes
on a healthy lifestyle and the development
21% were women.
of wellness plans are organised across
In addition, 20,135 employees of service units. Permanent employees of ITC receive
providers were engaged during the benefits such as periodic preventive health
same period.
check-ups, medical assistance (including
hospitalisation), group accident insurance,
11,592 direct employees are members of annual leave along with leave encashment
various unions. The Company continues and retirement benefits, among others. In
to invest in its time-tested approach to addition, most units have a wellness centre
progressive employee relations characterised and a resident doctor.
by the core principles of trusteeship, fairness
and equity, industrial democracy and In 2015-16, 100 employees availed maternity
partnership with enlightened trade unions. leave. In FY 2014-15, 135 employees had
ITC was able to sustain its excellent record of availed maternity leave of which 85 have
industrial harmony, highlighted not merely by continued working after a year, resulting in
the absence of strife, but by the more positive a return-to-work rate of 63%.
outcome of effective performance in terms of
ITC Hotels offers its employees a confidential
high productivity and superior quality.
counselling service so that they can seek
During the year, employee relations were professional help in a safe and secure
handled well and there was no stoppage of environment in dealing with issues such

Social Performance
as developing coping skills to meet life retirement, termination and abandonment
challenges, making important decisions or of services) in the Company, including ITC
exploring new avenues for change and growth. Infotech, for 2015-16 was 19%, across
management
and
non-management
To drive employee engagement and well- employees. The attrition for management
being, ITC’s Businesses have promoted level employees was 17%. The attrition for
diverse interventions ranging from employee non-management employees was 20%,
contests to generate innovative ideas to 81% of which happened in ITC Hotels and
communication and “connect” processes, ITC Infotech Limited. Gender-wise attrition
like town-hall meetings, local intranets and was at 17% and 33% for male and female
fun@work events as well as business specific employees, respectively. The attrition of
rewards and recognition programmes. female employees in ITC Infotech and ITC
Sports programmes and recreational events Hotels is an area of focus for the Company,
that encourage the creative talents of both and efforts are on to identify and resolve the
employees and their families are organised key dissonance factors.
periodically, and in some units participation
is extended to employees of service providers. Diversity and Equal
To capture ‘employee voice’, most units Opportunity
conduct periodic employee engagement
surveys wherein employees share their views ITC believes that diversity at the workplace
on the workplace. To promote mental and positively impacts work performance and
spiritual well-being, employees also have the work environment through superior
the opportunity to volunteer for a variety of consumer-centricity, innovative ideas and
social programmes.
better employee engagement. Employees
with diverse cultural backgrounds bring
Attrition
their own unique experiences, perceptions,
knowledge and skills, which when harnessed,
ITC has ensured attraction and retention of strengthen the organisation’s productivity
quality employees as a result of its talent and ability to proactively respond to changing
management strategy of offering diverse conditions. Equally, exposure to new ideas,
experiences and challenges across varied cultures and perspectives encourages the
business contexts, investments in the personal growth of employees.
development and growth of employees, as
well as a market-driven and competitive ITC’s Policy on Diversity and Equal
remuneration policy. The overall attrition Opportunity (please refer to Policies on
(comprising
voluntary
separation, ITC’s Corporate website, www.itcportal.

ITC believes
that diversity at
the workplace
positively
impacts work
performance
and the work
environment
through superior
consumercentricity,
innovative
ideas and better
employee
engagement

127

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

ITC’s
recruitment
and selection
processes are
geared towards
enabling
representation
from across
regions,
ethnicities,
religions and
different social
strata

com) and its implementation is focused on
fostering meritocracy in the organisation,
which promotes diversity and offers equal
opportunity to all employees. The intent is
to ensure that there is no discrimination
in compensation, training and employee
benefits, based on caste, religion, disability,
gender, sexual orientation, race, colour,
ancestry, marital status or affiliation with
a political, religious or union organisation
or majority/minority group. Given the
socio-cultural diversity of our country, ITC’s
recruitment and selection processes are
geared towards enabling representation
from across regions, ethnicities, religions
and different social strata.

resolution in a fair and just manner. During
the year, 8 complaints of sexual harassment
were received, 6 of which have since been
resolved and 2 are in the process of reaching
a resolution.

ITC’s Hotels Division has been proactively
creating awareness on the opportunities for
employing people with disabilities among
potential employers. It has prepared two
handbooks to guide industry action in this
endeavour – ‘ITC Hotels Disability Handbook
for Industry’ and ‘A Guide to Universal
Design in Built Environments: A Guide for
Creating Accessible Building Infrastructure
for Persons with Disability’. Presently there
are 71 differently abled employees working
ITC’s Company culture ensures that in ITC, the majority of whom are employed by
aspects of work-life balance for employees, the Hotels Business.
especially for women, are suitably
addressed. ITC demands, demonstrates ITC encourages local employment in
and promotes professional behaviour and its manufacturing units and hotels,
treats all employees with equal respect. depending on the availability of requisite
In this regard, ITC has put in place suitable skills. Some ITC Units partner with local
processes and mechanisms to ensure that Industrial Training Institutes to provide
issues relating to sexual harassment are vital inputs to the management of these
effectively addressed. In line with The institutions. ITC has also partnered with
Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace National Skill Development Corporation
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) (NSDC) empanelled agencies to impart
Act, 2013, Internal Complaints Committees market linked vocational training on skills
have been constituted in all units. These including sales & distribution, hospitality,
Committees are intended to facilitate electrical maintenance, automobile repairs,
open and structured discussions on sexual beautician and garment manufacturing with
harassment complaints and to ensure their the objective of enhancing the employability
of youth from disadvantaged sections
of society. During 2015-16, over 12,667
students were enrolled in Company promoted
vocational training programmes of which
34% were women and 40% were Scheduled
Caste/Scheduled Tribe candidates. ITC
Units also provide apprenticeship training
opportunities to a large number of youth.
Committed to employing youth from
disadvantaged communities, ITC has
enlarged its impact by increasing
the talent pool of youth from these
communities by equipping them with
the necessary skills or qualifications to
make them more employable in the formal
sectors of the economy. ITC places equal
emphasis on strengthening the economic
portfolio of poor households belonging to
marginalised groups through initiatives
aimed at natural resource management
and creation of off-farm opportunities to
create sustainable livelihoods.

128

Social Performance
During the year, the Company’s affirmative
action initiatives have had a direct
and tangible impact on the lives of
23,749
Scheduled
Caste/Scheduled
Tribe beneficiaries.

Learning and Development
ITC’s Capability Development Agenda flows
from its Vision, Mission, Strategic Agenda and
its 3-Horizon Growth strategy (sharpening/
expanding capabilities and leadership in its
current portfolio of businesses, blending
competencies residing in these businesses
to create new engines of growth, creating
capabilities for new future businesses). All
Learning and Development initiatives offered
during 2015-16 were aligned to this agenda.

ITC has a multi-pronged approach to
learning, with focused interventions in
core and functional areas, customised
business specific and organisation-wide
strategic interventions, as well as threetiered leadership development programmes.
Based on the premise that action learning
will lead to better skill development, the
programmes emphasise workplace projects
and demonstrated leadership behaviours
on the job rather than classroom learning,
making them more in the nature of long-term
journeys rather than short-term events.
Multiple forums for learning include
classroom training, on-the-job training,
inclusion in taskforces and projects,
mentoring and deploying organisation-wide
portals to enable sharing of best practices.

129

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

ITC recognises
its responsibility
to proactively
encourage high
standards of
human rights
across its supply
chain

Employee training at the factory level
focuses on continuous skill upgradation
on the basis of skill-gap assessment and
planned technology induction. In 2015-16,
1,49,264 person-days of formal training were
organised for employees at various levels. In
addition, on-the-job learning opportunities
were provided to a cross section of employees
supported by inputs from peers and superiors.
ITC’s Performance Management System
also plays a pivotal role in charting out the
development agenda of employees in the
management cadre. In 2015-16, all eligible
managers underwent performance reviews.

crores were invested on new factories,
hotels and modernisations.
All large contracts in ITC, for the construction
of hotels, factories, and significant
upgrades, have incorporated environment,
health, safety and human rights clauses
covering decent place of work, and beyond
compliance labour practices.
All large projects were managed and
supervised by ITC managers, who also
ensured compliance to relevant laws.

Systems have been established to ensure
compliance of our Policies and Standards,
through rigorous audits by Corporate
The ‘Gurukul’ – ITC’s state-of-the-art technical
Internal Audit.
training facility located in Ranjangaon – is a
significant milestone in its skilling journey.
Human Rights: Supply Chain
The first integrated facility catering to all the
Company’s FMCG Businesses, Gurukul offers As a large multi-business enterprise with
both short-term (1 to 2 weeks) and integrated products that are benchmarked nationally
long-term (1 year) programmes to enhance and internationally, ITC recognises its
shop floor skills.
responsibility to proactively encourage high
standards of human rights across its supply
chain. The Company’s approach to managing
human rights in the following distinct
categories is described below:

Human Rights

Human Rights: Significant
Investments

During 2015-16, nearly `899 crores
out of total capex cash flow of `2,167
crores was incurred on machinery and
technology, sourced from reputed global
suppliers/vendors. Approximately `760

130

ITC’s Businesses are vertically integrated
across several Divisions, all of which ensure
adherence to ITC’s Human Rights Policies.
ITC procures inputs for the Company’s
agri-based businesses entirely from state
controlled trading platforms and the open

Social Performance

market. The process is designed to ensure
transparency and best prices even for small
and marginal farmers.
ITC ensures that all its employees and all
service providers operating within Company
establishments adhere to its Policy on
Human Rights, Labour Practices and Decent
Work Environment. ITC has zero tolerance
for non-compliance in this area.
As a first step in ensuring a high degree
of awareness and emphasising ITC’s
focus on Human Rights and EHS in its
extended supply chain, the ‘ITC Code
of Conduct for Vendors and Service
Providers’ has been shared with supply chain
partners and accepted by identified vendors/
service providers.
During 2015-16, there were 1,790 service
providers of which 1,454 operated within the
Company’s premises and 336 worked off-site.
99% of service contracts with these service
providers include clauses in line with ITC
Human Rights Policies and EHS guidelines.
No contracts were cancelled during the year
as a result of non-compliance with ITC’s
Human Rights Policy.

Freedom of Association
During 2015-16, no incidents of violation
of Freedom of Association were reported
either at the concerned units or to statutory
authorities. Within ITC’s operations, there
are no areas that present risks to the right
to exercise Freedom of Association and
Collective Bargaining.

Prohibiting Child Labour and
Preventing Forced Labour at
the Workplace
During 2015-16, there were no incidents
of child labour or forced labour within
ITC establishments. The process of
strengthening systems to educate, mandate
and thereafter track adherence to ITC’s
Policy on Human Rights in the Supply Chain
has started with the sharing of the ‘ITC Code
of Conduct for Vendors and Service
Providers’. This process should be well
established over the next four years,
beginning with capacity building of vendors
and service providers on Human Rights to
be followed up with encouraging the supply
chain partners to undertake social audits.

Grievance Redressal Process
A Grievance Redressal Procedure for nonunionised employees has been implemented
to address concerns of internal stakeholders
pertaining to Labour Practices and Human
Rights violations. Aspects of employment
including compensation, working hours,
disciplinary practices, maternity protection,
occupational health & safety, training &
education, diversity & equal opportunity,
equal remuneration for men and women
as well as concerns in the area of Human
Rights, if any, will be addressed through this
mechanism.
During the year, 309 grievances were received
from workmen on matters pertaining to
welfare, facilities and administration and 227
of them have since been resolved.

The process of
strengthening
systems to
educate,
mandate and
thereafter track
adherence to
ITC’s Policy on
Human Rights
in the Supply
Chain has
started with
the sharing of
the ITC Code
of Conduct
for Vendors
and Service
Providers

131

Occupational
Health and
Safety
ITC believes its workforce is a key asset
contributing to the Company’s long-term
standing as one of India’s most admired
organisations. The Company believes that
a safe and healthy work environment is a
basic requirement for ensuring employee
well-being and that best practices in
occupational health and safety enhance the
Company’s overall performance. This helps
in attracting and retaining quality talent,
and enhances the equity of the Company as
a responsible Corporate.

continued investments in state-of-the-art
technology and quality human resources.

As a first step, EHS requirements are
integrated at the design stage itself for all
new investments in the built environment.
The design reviews cover building &
structural stability, fire & life safety
measures, electrical systems, segregation
of man-material movements, work place
lighting, ventilation & hygiene requirements,
noise & dust controls, water and energy use
optimisation, traffic safety, etc. The process
of incorporating EHS at the design stage not
only helps in eliminating/reducing hazards
but also optimises the overall infrastructure
ITC’s approach towards best-in-class as well as operational costs.
occupational health and safety standards
is articulated in the Board approved As a next step, compliance with EHS
Environment, Health and Safety (EHS) Policy standards during the construction phase
that emphasises on continual improvement is ensured by implementing appropriate
and is based on an EHS management system project EHS management systems. This
developed in accordance with internationally includes adequate training of all employees
recognised standards, supported by including service providers’ employees,

The ITC Approach

132

Social Performance
ensuring usage of safe equipment/tools/
tackles, development of and adherence to
safe work procedures/method statements,
observance of good housekeeping & storage
practices and usage of personal protective
equipment. Pre-commissioning audits of all
large projects are carried out by Corporate
EHS (CEHS) to ensure that all equipment and
systems have been procured and installed in
conformance with agreed standards and a
formal clearance is required to be provided
before the project can be operationalised.

to occupational hazards, undergo periodic
medical check-ups.

At the operational stage, all ITC factories,
hotels, warehouses and offices have
established EHS management systems
with designated roles and responsibilities
and competent resources to comply with
Corporate EHS Guidelines. Each ITC
Unit has EHS Committees to promote
active participation of employees in EHS
management. The EHS Committee meets at
least once every quarter to review the EHS
performance of the Unit. Health and safety
topics are also covered in the long-term
agreements with trade unions. During 201516, 2 such agreements had been signed.

The EHS resources of the Divisions provide
the support necessary to ensure proper
implementation of the ITC EHS policy,
while the Unit Heads and the Divisional
Management Committees are responsible
and accountable for ensuring compliance.
The CEHS function is responsible for
reviewing and updating standards and
guidelines on EHS policies, for providing
guidance and support to all concerned
and for monitoring compliance at the
corporate level.

ITC Corporate EHS Guidelines also require
raising of awareness amongst employees,
their families and surrounding communities
regarding off-the-job safety aspects such
as home safety, safe use of LPG in kitchen,
HIV/AIDs, hepatitis, dengue, malaria and
road safety. As part of ITC’s preventive
medical programme, various categories of
employees based on their age and exposure

Compliance is monitored through internal
audits by CEHS across ITC establishments
on a periodic basis and forms part of the
report back to CMC (monthly) and the Board
(quarterly), together with accident statistics,
their investigation and subsequent closure.
In addition, Business units adhere to
international standards such as OHSAS
18001 and ISO 14001.

On-site Safety
Performance
In 2015-16, the total number of on-site
Lost Time Accidents (LTA) in ITC was 18
(against 11 in 2014-15). All of these 18
accidents occurred to male employees and
out of these 5 occurred to ITC employees
and 13 to employees of service providers, as
depicted below.

Lost Time Accidents (LTA)

40 37
35
30
25
20
15

23

20
16

14

10

15

1616
12
7

5
0

15
10

13
7

4

5

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012- 2013 2014 2015-05
-06
-07
-08
-09
-10
-11
-12
13
-14
-15
16
ITC Employees

Employees of Service Providers*

ITC believes
that a safe and
healthy work
environment
is a basic
requirement
for ensuring
employee
well-being
and that best
practices in
occupational
health & safety
enhance the
Company’s
overall
performance

LTA- An accident where the injured does not return to work in the next scheduled shift
* ITC started reporting on the accident performance of its service providers’ employees from 2012-13.

133

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS
Lost Day Rate - ITC Employees

28.4*
25.3*

24.3*

30
25
20
15

6.5

10

2.2

3.5

5.5**
3.1

2.2

1.9

1.1

2012
-13

2013
-14

5
0
2005
-06

2006
-07

2007
-08

2008
-09

2009
-10

2010
-11

2011
-12

2014
-15

2015
-16

* Increase in lost day rate in 2009-10, 2011-12 & 2015-16 attributable to one fatal accident in each of these years,
wherein a loss of 6000 mandays is required to be accounted for as per IS 3786:1983.
** Increase in comparison to 2013-14, due to an accident wherein the injured suffered amputation of the right
thumb for which a loss of 1800 mandays is required to be accounted for as per IS 3786:1983.

Though there has been reduction in the
on-site accidents of ITC employees over
the years, the on-site accidents of service
providers’ employees increased to 13 from
4 in 2014-15. Analysis of root causes of the
accidents shows scope of improvement in
supervision of service providers’ employees
and system of risk identification & control.
Accordingly, necessary actions have been
implemented across the Units. In addition,
appropriate interventions have also been
taken at multiple Units in line with ITC’s
overall approach to inculcate a sense
of ownership at all levels and create an
organisation-wide safety culture.

There were two very unfortunate fatal
accidents during 2015-16, one involving
an ITC employee and other to an employee
of service provider. In the first case, an
ITC employee got exposed to toxic gases
(generated from manufacturing process)
while carrying out maintenance of a gas
handling system. The other fatal accident
happened in a construction site of an
upcoming ITC Unit wherein an electrical
panel fell upon an employee of service
provider while he was shifting the same.
Detailed investigations were carried out to
identify the root causes and accordingly,
appropriate interventions had been made
to avoid similar incidents in future. These
interventions included refining the risk
assessment process, improving emergency
response system and strengthening of
supervision of service providers’ employees.
Lost day rate, defined as the number of days
lost due to accidents for every 2,00,000
person hours worked, for ITC employees over
the years is depicted above.
Injury rate, defined as the frequency of
injuries in relation to total time worked,
for ITC employees also shows a significant
improvement. Since 2004-05, there
has been a substantial reduction in the
injury rate from 0.21 to 0.01 in 2015-16
(an improvement of 95%).

134

Social Performance
Injury Rate - ITC Employees

0.21
0.25
0.2
0.15

0.09

0.08

0.09

0.09
0.06

0.06

0.05

0.1

0.02

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.05
0

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
-05
-06
-07
-08
-09
-10
-11
-12
-13
-14
-15
-16

This year onwards, ITC has started reporting on the safety performance (lost day rate and
injury rate) of its service providers’ employees working within ITC premises. In 2015-16, the
lost day and injury rates for employees of service providers were 40.0 and 0.05 respectively.

Zero Accident Units
The following ITC units achieved ‘Zero On-site Accident’ status in 2015-16:
Manufacturing
Units

Cigarette Units at Munger,
Kolkata, Bengaluru,
Saharanpur and Pune
Leaf Threshing Units at
Chirala, Ananparti and
Mysuru

Hotels

Offices and others

ITC Maurya

ITC Head Office, Kolkata

ITC Mughal

Research Centre at
Rajahmundry

ITC Grand Central
ITC Rajputana
ITC Maratha

Packaging & Printing Units at
Haridwar and Munger

ITC Sonar

Paperboards and Specialty
Papers Units at Bollaram

ITC Grand Chola

Foods Units at Haridwar and
Munger

ITC Grand Bharat

Personal Care Products Units
at Manpura

My Fortune, Bengaluru

ITC Windsor

ITC Gardenia

My Fortune, Chennai

WelcomHotel Sheraton,
New Delhi
ITC Kakatiya

ITC Green Centre, Gurgaon
Divisional Headquarters of
Cigarettes Business, Agri
Business, Leaf Tobacco
Business, Paperboards &
Specialty Papers Business,
Packaging & Printing
Business, Foods Business,
Personal Care Products,
Matches & Agarbattis and
Education and Stationery
Products Business
ITC Green Centre, Manesar
Technico, Chandigarh &
Manpura

Fortune Resort Bay Island
Classic Golf & Country Club,
Gurgaon
Over the years, the number of Units delivering “zero on-site lost time accidents” performance has progressively
increased and more importantly, have held on to their performance. Out of the above 44 Units, 28 Units have been
consistently achieving “zero lost time accidents” status for the last 3 years.
135

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Off-site Safety
Performance
In line with its commitment to ensure the
safety of employees, ITC has also initiated
adequate measures for its employees working
off-site. In ITC, off-site is defined as all places
other than the premises where posted, while
on official duty, including commuting to
and from residence to place of work. Since
over the years the majority of the road
accidents have involved 2-wheeler riders,
a user interactive 2-wheeler rider’s safety
programme was developed and rolled out
in 2011-12, which has now been translated
into Hindi and other vernacular languages to
extend its reach. This programme, in 201516, has also been rolled out amongst supply
chain stakeholders, by imparting this training
to wholesale dealer personnel connected to
ITC’s Trade Marketing & Distribution vertical.

The total off-site lost time accidents in
2015-16 were 24 including 3 accidents
to women employees. Out of these
24 accidents, 22 were road accidents and
15 accidents involved 2-wheeler riders.
This year also witnessed 3 accidents to
4-wheeler users. During 2015-16, ITC
developed a user interactive training module,
specifically for 4-wheeler users.

Occupational
Health
A healthy workforce is an important
contributor to ITC’s competitiveness
and sustainability. All Units maintain a
conducive work environment meeting
Indian/International standards on hygiene,
lighting, ventilation and effective controls
on noise and dust. Units are provided with
occupational health centres with adequate

Road Accidents Trend

30
25

25

20

22

20
17

15

13

10

10

5
0
2010-11
136

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

2015-16

Social Performance
medical staff to monitor occupational health
and provide immediate relief, when required.
In addition, at least 2% of total employees
are professionally trained as first aiders.
Identified medical examinations are conducted
at specified intervals for various categories of
employees based on age as well as exposure
to occupational hazards. Accordingly in 201516, 14,486 employees underwent preventive
medical examinations and there were no
occupation related illnesses identified in any
of ITC’s Business Units.

HIV/AIDS and
Other Serious
Diseases
ITC remains committed to protecting its
employees from the threat posed by various
serious diseases including HIV/AIDS.
During 2015-16, the awareness/counselling
sessions conducted for the employees and
communities around ITC’s Units covered a
total of 11,708 people, out of which 10,408
were employees of the Company, while the
remaining were local community members.

The Road Ahead
Based on the root-cause analysis of accidents
over the years, the approach to safety has
been redefined with the focus now on
fostering a culture of safety and the use of

behavioural architecture techniques. In line
with the Company’s EHS policy, the approach
is to institutionalise safety as a value-led
concept with focus on inculcating a sense of
ownership at all levels, leading to the creation
of a safety culture. Periodic reviews are
undertaken to ensure that training and other
communications are relevant and take into
account the local socio-economic context
to ensure the transition from “awareness
developed” to “changed behaviour”. During
2015-16, the safety culture initiative has been
further extended to 4 more manufacturing
Units. In addition, the initiative has also been
rolled out in the Divisional Head Quarters
(DHQ) of Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Business with an objective to develop a
cohesive safety culture across factories and
offices. Continuing this approach, ITC has
plans to extend this initiative in the Corporate
Head Office.

Based on the
root-cause
analysis of
accidents over
the years, the
approach to
safety has been
redefined with
the focus now
on fostering a
culture of safety

While ITC will continue to focus on
strengthening the engineering control
measures through ‘design for safety’, precommissioning/operational
audits
and
training interventions, based on the
encouraging results achieved, ITC plans to
expand the coverage of behavioural based
safety and custom-made risk based training
programmes to other units. This approach
which
combines
empowerment
and
ownership with targeted interventions and
strict accountability should help ITC in its
journey to achieve the “Zero Accidents” goal.

137

ITC’s Mission
Sunehra Kal
for Sustainable &
Inclusive Growth
Management
Approach - Society

These programmes fall within the purview
of Schedule VII of the provisions of Section
135 of the Companies Act, 2013 and the
Companies (Corporate Social Responsibility
Policy) Rules, 2014. The Policy was adopted
in 2014-15 and continues in its original form
since there have been no developments
in the external or internal environment to
prompt a review.

ITC believes that the performance of business
enterprises must be measured in terms of
the value they create for society. Enterprises
that embed sustainability in their business
strategies can deliver substantial stakeholder
value through innovative development
models that simultaneously create livelihood Commitments
opportunities and a positive environmental
footprint. The Company firmly believes that Statement of Intent: ITC’s Social Investments
such an approach unleashes strong drivers Programme (SIP) aims to transform the lives
for achieving development with social equity. of even the most marginalised amongst its
stakeholder groups to live a life of dignity.
Our way of grassroots empowerment, based
Policy
on knowledge and technology transfer,
The Board of the Company has approved confronts livelihood challenges of today and
a CSR Policy that covers the programmes, tomorrow through a holistic approach to
projects and activities that the Company create a prosperous, healthy, educated and
plans to undertake to create a significant skilled community which looks to the future
positive impact on its identified stakeholders. with confidence and determination.
138

Social Performance
In order to actualise this intent, the Company
is committed to ensure the following:
Continue to strive for scale in the core
operational geographies and remain
contemporary by leveraging government
partnerships and accessing knowledge/
technical know-how.
Strengthen and empower Community
Based Organisations in all our project areas
for participatory planning, ownership and
long-term sustainability of interventions.
Move beyond mere asset creation to
behaviour change through focus on demand
generation for all interventions to ensure
ownership, participation and contribution.
Specially target poor and marginalised
communities/groups in our catchments
to ensure inclusive development and
thus impact human development
indices significantly.

Goals & Targets
Context: In line with the Company’s CSR
Policy, the key stakeholders, based on the
material aspects of our Businesses, comprise:
Rural communities with whom ITC’s Agri
Businesses have forged long and enduring
Business

ILTD

partnerships through crop development
and procurement activities. While such
economic linkages have generated wealth
for rural households on a sustained basis for
decades, they also look to the Company to
help find viable solutions to combat extreme
weather episodes that impose a threat to
their production system.
Communities residing in close proximity
to our production units: Situated in
urban and semi-rural hinterlands, these
communities derive considerable benefits
from the multiplier effects arising from
the operations. Nevertheless, there is an
expectation that the Company will aid in
creation of the necessary socio-economic
infrastructure, thus contributing to human
and social capital.
Core Operational Areas: Our commitment
to transformational change in the lives of
our stakeholders demands a very intensive
and deep engagement. It was necessary
therefore to rank all current locations of
SIP’s interventions in an order of priority
to delineate those which are of prime
importance to concerned businesses. Based
on parameters relevant to businesses (given
in the table below) and in consultation
with them, core villages and clusters were
identified during the year.

State & Districts
Andhra Pradesh - Prakasam, Nellore, West
Godavari & Guntur

ITC’s Social
Investments
Programmes
accesses
knowledge/
technical know
how, leverages
government
partnerships
and focuses on
core operational
geographies
to promote
all-inclusive
development.
The initiatives
aim at creating
“Adarsh”
habitations
aligned to
national
priorities
and goals

Logic for Core Areas

All Adarsh Gram Villages identified by
the Division

Karnataka – Mysuru
Madhya Pradesh - Sehore, Vidisha, Guna
& Ashoknagar
ABD

Uttar Pradesh - Chandauli & Allahabad

Wheat crop areas with high procurement
& higher presence of poor and
marginalised communities

Rajasthan - Kota, Baran, Jhalawar & Bundi

PSPD

Telangana – Khammam

Villages with significant area under
plantations with high future potential
within a radius of 50 kms in
Khammam district

Factories

Prakasam, East Godavari, Khammam,
Chennai, Krishnagiri, Coimbatore, Mysuru,
Bengaluru, Kolar, Pune, Saharanpur,
Haridwar, Baddi, Munger, Kolkata, Howrah,
Hooghly, Kamrup, Darrang, Kapurthala

Villages/municipalities within 5 kms
radius plus any other locality
recommended by the factory
139

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Based on these parameters, a total of 103 core clusters have been demarcated comprising
902 villages/wards which would form the nucleus of the 2 Horizons suite of interventions in
the coming years and therefore require a significantly larger outlay of Social Investments.
Dominant Profile of Core Areas: In order to design a well-targeted programme, it was also
necessary to identify some of the main demographic and agro-ecological characteristics of
the core areas. Data for this was captured through household questionnaire surveys covering
1.16 lakh households, which formed 22% of the total households in the core areas.
The accompanying table provides a glimpse of some of the important indicators that would
have a bearing on our work.
Stakeholder Profile

5 lakh households
1/3rd Poor
5% women headed

24 lakh population
23% SC/ST

30% of population
< 14 years

25% of population
between 14-25 years
of age

Fragmented landholding
1 ha average size
60% small & marginal

Arable area - 2.13 lakh ha
60% rainfed agriculture

Insights: The information from the needs assessments combined with the survey data of
households provides important inputs into the nature of the development challenges faced
by our stakeholder communities:
Poverty remains a challenge in the core areas, and is endemic to both rural and urban
populations. Stunted growth and infant and maternal mortality are cause for concern in
some states. Going forward there is urgent need to focus on the poor, the marginalised
and women headed households.
Farming remains the mainstay of nearly half of the households, which is dominated by small
holder agriculture. Clearly, the focus of future interventions in rural areas must be to sustain
smallholder dynamism through integrated farming systems to drive agricultural growth. It is
equally important, in their context, to augment and sustainably manage common pool resources
since poor rural households are crucially dependent on them to meet several subsistence
needs, especially that of fuelwood and fodder.
Like the rest of India, more than half of agriculture in our core area is rainfed. Since
inception, ITC’s Social Investments Programmes had identified development of water
resources as a major priority area. Going forward, it is proposed to align watershed plans
to geo-hydrological mapping of the project areas to ensure maximum aquifer recharge
and work at a sub-basin revival to ensure year-round environmental flows.
140

Social Performance

Off-farm opportunities are circumscribed
in the project areas. Reduction in youth
unemployment has also emerged as a
priority to end extreme poverty and boost
sustainable economic growth in India. ITC
recognised the social risks of having large
numbers of uneducated, unemployed
and untrained youth, evident from the
significant boost given to vocational
training in 2014-15.

workforce, evident from its large-scale
education initiatives.
Two Horizons Approach: ITC’s stakeholders
are confronted with multiple, but inter-related
issues, at the core of which are the twin
challenges of securing sustainable livelihoods
today and tomorrow for both rural and urban
households, calling for a 2-horizon perspective:

Horizon 1: Making today’s dominant source(s)
of livelihoods sustainable; and
One possible explanation for availability Horizon 2: Creating capabilities for wealth
of low quality skills is the poor state generation and employment for tomorrow.
of primary education in the country. ITC
has always believed that universalisation This obviously calls for an integrated approach
of primary education is vital for to development, comprising several layers of
developing a productive and skilled interventions that are summarised below:
Horizon

Horizon 1:
Making today’s
dominant source(s) of
livelihoods sustainable

Horizon 2:
Creating capabilities for
tomorrow

Objectives

Enable the poor to
manage and reduce risks
in their current portfolio
of economic activities

Improve habitats to
reduce morbidity
and ensure a healthy
community
Invest in education to
enable young people to
develop skills for gainful
employment

Initiatives & Interventions
ON-FARM:
Natural resource management & sustainable
farm practices to strengthen agriculture
OFF-FARM:
Create non-farm livelihood opportunities,
especially for women

Invest in social infrastructure

Focus on quality learning in schools
Align skills training with market demand
141

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Desired Outcomes – Adarsh Habitations:
If such a holistic approach is followed, we will
establish enabling conditions for the emergence
of “Adarsh” habitations with indicators aligned
to national priorities and goals, whether in the
area of protection of natural resources or the
development of human capabilities.

Indices benchmarked to the national
MDG goals are given in the table
below along with the range of baselines
for each of the indicator. Quite
obviously, the attainment of national
benchmarks are long-term goals with a
5-year time horizon.

Long-term Outcome Indicators
Baseline
Desired Outcome

Indicator

Sustainable
Agriculture

Soil Organic carbon

0.75 - 1 %

Water Security

Ground water
recharge

Safe Category

Fuel & Fodder
Security

Area under biomass

33% of total
geographical area

Universal Primary
Education

Improvement in
Health Status

Eradicate Extreme
Poverty & Hunger

Benchmark

Enrolment

100%

Maternal mortality
ratio

National MDG goal
- 109*

Infant mortality
ratio

National MDG goal
- 27**

Prevalence of
under-weight
children

National MDG goal
26%

Best

Worst

1.19%

0.40%

(Mangaldoi)

(Kapurthala)

SAFE

Over Exploited

(Pune)

(Kapurthala & Kolar)

59%

0%

(Baran)

(Kapurthala)

100%

60%

(Coimbatore &
Darrang)

(Kolkata)

36

366

(Krishnagiri)

(Mangaldoi)

14

76

(Coimbatore)

(Saharanpur)

2%

40%

(Prakasam)

(Sehore & Saharanpur)

* Deaths per 1 lakh live births ** Deaths of infants less than 1 year old per thousand live births

142

Social Performance

Targets & Timelines
Based on the 2 Horizons strategy, a number of specific interventions have been put in place
in order to achieve the desired goals. These are detailed in the table below along with the
estimated time it would take to achieve these targets.

Objective

Initiatives

UoM

Longterm
target

Achieved
to date

Balance
Target

Timeline*
(years)

Horizon I - Sustainable Livelihoods Today
De-risk poor rural households
by diversifying farm portfolios
through the promotion of
tree-based farming
Integrate diverse elements
of the rural portfolio of
initiatives into a Climate
Smart Village approach

Ensure water security for
all stakeholders through
watershed development &
managed aquifer recharge

Social
Forestry

Hectares

2,27,560

87,674

1,39,886

10

Agro-forestry

Hectares

95,065

24,566

70,499

10

Sustainable
agriculture

Hectares 11,78,518

58,105

11,20,413

15

Watershed
Area

Hectares

9,09,960

2,59,050

6,50,910

10

Structures

Nos.

27,299

7,998

19,301

10

Hectares

23,332

3,943

19,389

10

1,50,014

51,027

98,987

13

Biodiversity
Conservation
Actively promote non-farm
livelihood opportunities to
diversify income portfolios of
poor households

Women
covered

Nos.

Horizon II - Creating Capabilities for Tomorrow
Ensure that every child is
in school and learning well
through improvement in
pedagogy and the learning
environment
Align skills training to
market demand to maximise
employment of youth from
our core areas

Reduce morbidity, especially
amongst women and children,
by promoting a clean and
healthy environment

Children
covered

Nos.

7,13,446

4,60,967

2,52,479

10

Schools
covered

Nos.

1,491

1,322

169

10

Youth
enrolled

Nos.

2,82,060

31,367

2,50,693

15

Toilets
constructed

Nos.

1,31,100

15,429

1,15,671

14

SWM households
covered

Nos.

2,60,176

42,159

2,18,017

15

* Timeline from base year of 2016-17

143

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Responsibilities
Consultations on the annual plans take place
at two levels: (1) Annually, with the relevant
business managers where the projects are
located. The objective is to get a business
perspective on community issues faced
by them and which they would like to be
addressed; (2) Assessment of the problems
and needs of the community through
detailed Need Assessment surveys normally
done once in five years for on-going projects
or at the start of each new intervention/entry
into a new location.
The two perspectives are then mapped to
find a common ground and the Company’s
view is shared with the NGOs to ensure
that both stakeholders develop and work
towards a common set of goals and agenda.
Annual plans are thereafter finalised in
consultation with programme implementing
agencies (NGOs) and the community based
institutions, keeping the Company’s focus
areas, emerging needs of the catchment and
funds available on the radar.

The projects
promoted under
the Social
Investments
Programmes are
spread over in
166 districts in
26 states

144

Board’s approval, the SIP Plan outlining the
interventions to be carried out during the
financial year and the specified budgets
therein. The Board deliberates and approves
the CSR Plan with modifications that may
be deemed necessary. The Company’s
Corporate Management Committee (CMC)
reviews the implementation of the SIP and
issues necessary directions from time to time
to ensure efficient and effective execution
of SIP in accordance with this Policy. In
addition, the CMC provides a status update to
the CSR and Sustainability Committee on the
progress in implementation of the approved
CSR Programmes. The CSR and Sustainability
Committee reviews such reports and keeps
the Board apprised of the implementation
status of the same.

Specific Actions

ITC’s Social Investments Programmes access
knowledge/technical know-how, leverage
government partnerships and focus on
core operational geographies to promote
all-inclusive development. The initiatives
aim at creating “Adarsh” habitations aligned
These plans are then aggregated and to national priorities and goals, both in the
presented to the Management Committee of area of protection of natural resources and
the Social Investments Programmes which development of human capabilities.
scrutinises the proposals and forwards it
to the Corporate Management Committee Coverage
for its approval during the annual business
plan presentations. These proposals are The projects promoted under the Social
then presented to the CSR/Sustainability Investments Programmes are spread over
Board Committee which tables for the 166 districts in 26 states.

Social Performance

Horizon I:
Sustainable Livelihoods Today

ITC’s e-Choupal
The ITC e-Choupal initiative is a powerful
example of a development model that delivers
large-scale societal value by co-creating rural
markets with local communities. Recognising
the various challenges faced by farmers, like
fragmented farms, weak infrastructure and
involvement of numerous intermediaries, ITC
designed e-Choupal to deliver enhanced value
to all participants in the value chain, especially
farmers. With a judicious blend of click & mortar
capabilities, ITC e-Choupal has triggered a
virtuous cycle of higher productivity, higher
incomes and enhanced capacity for farmer risk
management, larger investments and higher
quality and productivity.

The e-Choupal network also provides onfarm agri extension services. Reaching
the fruits of scientific and technological
research to the farmer, demonstration farms
called Choupal Pradarshan Khets have been
set up to propagate best practices, while
field schools enable transfer and adoption
of knowledge. The programme offers other
services like consultation and supervision by
experts, soil testing, balanced fertilisation,
foundation seeds and seed treatment,
water, weed, pest and post-harvest crops
management and supply of quality inputs
like drought-resistant seeds to improve
farm competencies.

ITC e-Choupal
has triggered
a virtuous
cycle of higher
productivity,
higher incomes
and enhanced
capacity for
farmer risk
management,
larger
investments
and higher
quality and
productivity

ITC e-Choupal enhances the ability of
farmers to take informed decisions, aligns
their farm output with market demand and
ensures higher quality and productivity.
The aggregation of demand for farm inputs
from individual farmers gives them access
to high quality inputs from established
The
initiative
has
enhanced
the manufacturers at fair prices.
competitiveness of Indian agriculture
by leveraging the power of Information Launched in June 2000, ITC e-Choupal is
Technology to empower small and marginal today the largest initiative among Internetfarmers. Village internet-kiosks managed based interventions in rural India. Its services
by farmers themselves, called “sanchalaks”, reach out to more than 4 million farmers in
facilitate access to information to other over 35,000 villages through 6,100 kiosks
farmers, in their own local language. Real- spread across 10 states.
time information on weather forecasts
and market prices, customised knowledge The intervention is an important component
on scientific farm practices and risk of ITC’s multi-dimensional Integrated Rural
management are supplemented by the Development Programme that has evolved
availability of quality farm inputs and price from its deep understanding of the challenges
discovery of farm produce within the village. and opportunities inherent in the farm sector.

145

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

The Farm and
Social Forestry
programmes
have greened
nearly 225,293
hectares of area
that generated
over 101 million
person-days of
employment

Social Forestry

During the year, 142,539 MT of wood
was harvested leading to a total wealth
The programme is aimed at providing food, generation of `63.82 crores for poor and
fuel and fodder security through plantations marginal farmers. Of this 6,754 tonnes was
by enabling financial, technical and marketing FSC certified wood which again benefited
support to small and marginal farmers.
farmers in the form of premium payment.
Commencing in 2001-02, the programme
has covered nearly 64,795 hectares under
pulpwood plantation and 22,879 hectares
under energy plantation. To date, the Farm
and Social Forestry Programmes have
greened nearly 225,293 hectares of area
that generated over 101 million persondays of employment. The area under Agro
Forestry (AF) that facilitates cultivation of
trees along with crops on continuous basis
has been given a major emphasis in recent
years evident from the rapid increase in area
shown in the chart.
Social Forestry Coverage
Activity

2014
-15

2015
-16

Cum to
2015-16

No. of new
beneficiaries

9,241

10,655

3,848
492
2012-13

2013-14 2014-15 2015-16

Activity
1,284

813

4,533

17,397 15,634

85,701

Plantation Area

146

Agro Forestry Area (Ha)

Economic Retuns from Social Forestry

Coverage
No. of new
villages

To meet the increasing demand, sapling stock
was augmented by leveraging four women
run nurseries. These nurseries, managed
by 106 women, supplied 34 lakh saplings of

Pulpwood (Ha.) 10,109 10,081

64,795

Energy (Ha.)

22,879

10,246 10,056

Saplings
Planted
(Lakhs)

1,078

Agro Forestry
Area (Ha.)

9,241 10,655

785

4,800
24,566

2014-15 2015-16

Harvest
Area (Ha.)

2,000

3,060

Farmers (No.)

3,533

3,290

Volume harvested (MT)

1,21,498

1,42,539

Total Income (` Lakhs)

6,078

6,382

Repayment to
committee/NGO
(` Lakhs)

24.17

34.67

Earnings/Household (`) 1,72,036

1,93,967

Earnings/Hectare (`)

2,08,546

3,03,902

Social Performance
Findings from Studies of Agro Forestry Projects

Recently conducted studies on Agro
Forestry by independent agencies
highlight several interesting findings:
Agro Forestry is preferred by small and
marginal farmers compared to large
farmers since it is important for them to
maximise annual incomes. Diversifying
into tree crops also emerged as an
important risk mitigation strategy for
this group.
Agro Forestry did not constrain farmers
from the choice of their intercrop,
though commercial crops were the most
preferred, with cotton emerging as the
dominant crop in rainfed fields within
this category.

Earning per acre from Agro Forestry
plots were found to be 25% higher than
pure block plantation of trees and 18%
higher than only field crops.
The model is especially attractive for
resource starved small-holders on
account of lump-sum earnings every
four years from wood harvest, which are
invested in productive assets or towards
improving the HDI of households. Some
major investments made by households
were on agricultural improvement,
irrigation, household assets, health
and education, all critical for setting in
motion a virtuous cycle of growth.

eucalyptus and subabul for the Social Forestry farmers. The focus of these demonstrations
Programme worth `68 lakh, thus becoming an was on sustainable farm practices like
moisture conservation, promotion of
important source of livelihoods for them.
bio-fertilisers, zero-tillage, prophylactic
Sustainable Agriculture
pest management, etc.
Sustainable agriculture aims to improve
productivity and profitability of agriculture
through low-input based agricultural
production systems and by promoting small
land-holder friendly mechanisation.
Choupal Pradarshan Khets promoted
field demonstrations of seed varieties
and production practices for improved
yield and quality in soybean, wheat, rice,
summer pulses and horticultural crops in
more than 5,000 villages covering around
64,000 hectares and more than 60,000

In addition, 764 Farmer Field Schools (FFS)
disseminated know-how on advanced
agri practices to over 16,969 farmers
through 2,464 demonstration plots under
different crops. 228 Agri Business Centres
rendered extension services, promoted best
practices, arranged agri credit linkages and
established collective input procurement and
agricultural equipment on hire. In pursuit of
our long-term objective of increasing soil
organic carbon, 7,314 compost units were
constructed during the year thus taking the
cumulative total to 30,868.

Choupal
Pradarshan
Khets
promoted field
demonstrations
of seed varieties
and production
practices for
improved yield
and quality in
soybean, wheat,
rice, summer
pulses and
horticultural
crops in more
than 5,000
villages
covering around
64,000 hectares
and more than
60,000 farmers

147

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS
Adoption of Zero Till

Zero tillage method of wheat cultivation was promoted on 44,274 hectares during the
year to reduce requirement of water, labour, cultivation costs, and improve organic carbon
content of soil. In addition to its continuation in existing areas, it was newly introduced
in 3 districts of UP and Bihar.
Based on secondary research it is found that farmers can derive the following benefits
from the widespread adoption of this practice:
Improvement of organic carbon content in soil;
Reduction of methane gas emission;
Increase in biomass coverage through year round crop development programme; and
Prevention of soil damage and protection of soil health through zero tillage practice.
Sustainable Agriculture Coverage
Activity

Cum to
2015-16

2014-15

2015-16

58

138

808

879

581

2,649

Demonstration plots (Nos.)

7,736

2,464

36,542

Area under Demonstration Plots (Ha.)

2,717

1,133

12,975

Compost Units (Nos.)

3,668

7,314

30,868

521

764

764

21,064

16,969

16,969

137

228

228

15,454

18,987

18,987

Minor Irrigation
Group Irrigation (Nos.)
Sprinklers (Nos.)
Sustainable Agriculture

Farmer Field Schools (Functional Nos.)
Farmer Field Students (Functional Nos.)
Agri Business Centres
No of ABCs (Functional Nos.)
Farmers Serviced (Nos.)

To give a boost to inclusion of women in
agriculture, 50 women led FFS were formed
with 1,250 women farmers in Rajasthan,
MP, Bihar, Maharashtra & Karnataka and 5
women owned custom hiring centres were
launched in Rajasthan.

Soil & Moisture Conservation
towards Water Security
The programme promotes local management
of water resources by facilitating communitybased participation in planning and
executing watershed projects in 10 states
and 42 districts.
This initiative has covered over 58,800
hectares area in 2015-16 thus taking the total
area under soil and moisture conservation to
over 2,59,000 hectares. 7,998 water harvesting
structures have been constructed so far thus
contributing to fresh rainwater harvesting
potential of 3.57 million CuM. For maintenance
of these structures over 385 Water User Groups
were formed during the year.
148

Social Performance

Watershed Development Coverage
2014-15

2015-16

Cum to
2015-16

Minor Structures (No.)

1,159

1,186

5,321

Major Structures (No.)

331

348

2,677

1,490

1,534

7,998

Area Treated (Ha.)

32,644

41,694

1,72,663

Critical Irrigation Area (Ha.)

18,753

17,169

86,387

Total Watershed Area

51,397

58,864

2,59,050

3.22

3.57

27.34

32,960

44,287

2,05,418

7.15

4.76

52.09

Activity
Water-harvesting

Total Structures
Watershed Area

Water Storage Capacity (Million CuM)
Direct Beneficiaries (No.)
Employment mandays (Lakhs)

Public Private Partnership for Watershed Development

The total target area under PPP projects, in partnership with NABARD and the governments of MP, Rajasthan
and Maharashtra is over 1.58 lakh hectares. The largest partnership is with MGNREGA (68,114 ha) followed by
NABARD (43,450 ha) and IWMP (46,691 ha).
IWDP/IWMP

Coverage Area in
PPP Projects by Source

IWDP/IWMP

NABARD

14,372

32,319

MGNREGA

30%

27%

23,107

45,007

NABARD
43%
5,299

38,151
MGNREGA

0%
Actual

20%
40%
Balance

60%

80%

100%

149

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

The Animal
Husbandry
Programme
unveils
opportunity
for farmers
to convert an
existing asset
into a substantial
supplementary
income with
the potential
of growing into
a sustainable
source of
livelihood

Animal Husbandry Services

milch animals and genetically upgrade lowyielding indigenous stock through artificial
The Animal Husbandry Programme unveils insemination to produce cross-bred progeny
opportunity for farmers to convert an existing with much higher milk yields.
asset into a substantial supplementary
income with the potential of growing into Initiated in 2003-04, there are currently 238
a sustainable source of livelihood. This Cattle Development Centres (CDCs) spread
programme provided extension services, across 24 districts. During 2015-16, 2.29
including breeding, fodder propagation lakhs Artificial Inseminations (AIs) were
and training of farmers to increase farm performed that has led to birth of 91,850
incomes through enhanced productivity of cross-bred progeny.
Animal Husbandry Coverage
Activity

CDC Centres
(Functional
No.)

2014
-15

256

2015
-16

Cattle Development Centres
Cum
to
2015
-16

238

238

Andhra
Pradesh, 29
Maharastha,
42

Telengana,
8
Karnataka,
36

Breed Improvement
No. of AIs
(Lakhs)

2.24

2.29

17.91

No. of
pregnancies
(Lakhs)

1.04

1.21

8.48

No. of calfing
(Lakhs)

0.80

0.92

5.70

Vaccination
& Health
(Lakhs)

0.43

0.84

6.31

Madhya
Pradesh, 72
Odisha, 5

Uttar
Pradesh, 46

Learning from the Impact Assessment of the Livestock Programme in Madhya Pradesh

A study on the animal husbandry
programme in MP found that:
Prima facie, the data did not show
that yield impacts in ITC project areas
were significantly higher than others.
It was certainly striking against nondescript animals, but not so for control
farmers using AI services of other agencies.
Evidently, other service providers have also
started using equally high quality semen.
The programme progenies are realising
only 70-80% of their potential milk yield,
which definitely needs to be maximised.
The solution seems to lie in what the
beneficiaries themselves pointed out
consistently about the programme: we
150

clearly need to provide superior quality
of service, better response time and
an integrated package of practices as
compared to other service providers.
According to the report, significant
productivity gains can be had with
4 interventions:
Increase coverage of nutrient mixture
and supplements to more than 90%
of beneficiary households, from the
current 72%.
Significantly increase in area
household under green fodder.
Deworming every 3 months.
Timely vaccination.

per

Social Performance

marginalised women towards their socioeconomic mainstreaming. The Programme is
currently operational in 7 districts of Bihar,
This initiative specifically targets poor West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Telangana,
women to provide them a range of gainful Rajasthan and Assam.
employment opportunities supported with
financial assistance by way of loans and Over 350 Self Help Groups (SHGs) were
grants. Wherever feasible, market linkages formed during the year and 3,800 members
have also been created for long-term joined these groups. Members of SHGs and
other institutions were linked to individual
sustainability.
bank accounts under the Pradhan Mantri
Initiated in 2014, a holistic intervention Jan Dhan Yojana, Pradhan Mantri Suraksha
currently supports 10,200 ultra poor and Bima Yojana (PMSBY) and Pradhan Mantri

Women’s Economic
Empowerment

Ultra Poor Women Progress
Beneficiaries

2015-16

Women Selected

10,200

Women Trained

10,200

Women Provided Assets

10,200

Enterprise (Asset distribution)
On-Farm Assets

4,799

Off-Farm Assets

4,199

Mixed

1,202

Social Security
Women having Savings Account

6,281

Women able to write names and numbers

6,712

Women with access to formal health services

3,582

ITC’s Women’s
Economic
Empowerment
Initiative
specifically
targets poor
women to
provide them a
range of gainful
employment
opportunities
supported
with financial
assistance by
way of loans
and grants

151

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana (PMJJY). 55,925 beneficiaries (men and women) were covered
under the PMSBY, 26,867 members under the PMJJY and 39,105 under Pradhan Mantri Jan
Dhan Yojana.
Case Study of Subhashini, Ultra Poor Beneficiary, Tribeni, Hooghly

I am a resident of Bishpara village under Chandrahati-I GP of Chinsurah Mogra block, Hooghly
district. 10 years back when I was abandoned by my husband, I and my 4 year old daughter
went back to my maternal house as a primary shelter. I then started working as housemaid to
earn my own livelihood with a meagre amount of `700 per month.
In January 2015, I got selected as a beneficiary under ITC’s THP programme after completion
of their Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) exercise. I was given handholding support to
write my name, recognise and write digits and numbers. I was also helped to open a savings
bank account, which got linked to the Pradhan Mantri Surakshya Bima Yojana. Then I got
trained in entrepreneurial skills which instilled confidence and faith in me to set up and run my
own business in a small scale. I got assets and fixed capital to set up my flour making business.
Now this business fetches me an average monthly income of `4,000 and I have plans to buy a
kiosk to put up in front of school for selling eatables.

Horizon II:
Creating Capabilities for
Tomorrow

Hygiene (WASH) practices in schools/
anganwadis in a manner where operations
and maintenance become sustainable.
Primary Education Coverage

Primary Education
ITC’s Education Programme aims to
provide weaker sections of society access
to education with focus on learning
outcomes and retention. Another area
of focus is development of ‘child friendly
schools’ through strengthening of school
infrastructure (boundary walls, additional
classrooms, sanitation and drinking water
facilities, furniture and electrical fittings)
and introducing Water Sanitation and

2014
-15

2015
-16

Cum
to
2015
-16

Govt Schools
Infra support
(Nos.)

147

164

1,322

Children
covered in
Pratham’s
Read
India Plus
Programme
(Lakh)

0.54

0.46

NA

Activity
Education

Supplementary Learning Centres Spread
Himachal
Pradesh, 4
Andhra
Pradesh, 43

West
Bengal, 31

Uttar
Pradesh, 20

Uttarakhand,
10
Tamil Nadu,
8
152

Karnataka,
25

Telangana,
35

153

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Vocational Training
ITC’s Vocational Training Programme
focuses on building market relevant skills so
as to make potential job seekers industryready and employable in the manufacturing
or service sectors. Skill training is offered
in trades including hospitality, tailoring,
beautician,
automotive,
electrical,

construction, computer skills, security skills,
bedside nursing and retail. Initiated in 2001,
the Programme has impacted over 31,367
youth in 31 districts of 15 states. Of the
total enrolled, 41% were from the SC and ST
communities and 36% were female students.
68% of the students trained in 2015-16 have
been placed at salaries ranging from `3000
to `11,000 per month.
The company continues to work with the
Welcomgroup Graduate School of Hotel
Administration (WGSHA) together with Dr.
TMA Pai Foundation to cater to the ever
growing need for professionally trained
human resources in the hospitality industry.
WGSHA has been recently rated by CEO World
Magazine amongst the top 50 hospitality
schools in the world. In addition, since the
inception of ITC Culinary Skills Training
Centre, Chhindwara in 2014, 41 trainee chefs
in three batches have successfully completed
the 6-months Programme wherein cooking
skills are imparted to youth from the lower
economic strata.

Trade-wise Coverage in Skilling
Enrolment

Till 2013-14

2014-15

2015-16

Cum to date

All Trades

6,315

13,180

11,872

31,367

Hospitality

1,489

3,252

3,361

8,102

Electrical

341

1,915

1,960

4,216

Soft Skills - Retail/Marketing/Spoken English/
Technician Course

968

1,484

1,748

4,200

Tailoring & Beautician

776

2,357

741

3,874

Computer Skills

757

1,765

351

2,873

Automobile

337

1,144

1,238

2,719

Garment Manufacturing/Industrial Sewing Machine
Operations (ISMO)

662

254

565

1,481

-

654

1,219

1,873

Driving

838

-

-

838

Security

66

28

-

94

Printing and Packing

-

316

110

426

ITeS/Data entry operator

-

-

230

230

Material Handling

-

-

150

150

Fitter and welding

-

-

101

101

81

11

-

92

BPO

-

-

55

55

Others

-

-

43

43

Bedside Nursing

Construction

154

Social Performance

Sanitation

Water Purification Plant and it is maintained
by the community thereby making it a selfsustainable model. The beneficiaries pay for
the water, which provides the revenues for
the running and maintenance of the plant.
37 RO plants were established in 2015-16 to
provide safe drinking water to about 31,450
rural people in the state of Andhra Pradesh.

In order to promote overall health and reduce
incidence of water-borne diseases through
prevention of open defecation, ITC has
promoted low cost toilets on a cost sharing
basis, coupled with high impact awareness
campaigns directed at the community
to bring higher levels of ownership and
behavioural change at the grassroots level. The Company continued its work on creating
awareness on maternal and child health
Operational in 10 states, the year 2015-16 through a network of 285 women VHCs who
recorded construction of 7,175 household covered nearly 1 lakh women and adolescent
toilets, which is the highest since inception children. Swasthya Choupal, the Company’s
– 5,231 were constructed through e-Choupal Rural Health initiative, is
direct Company contribution and 1,944 operational in 7 districts of Uttar Pradesh
constructed through convergence with and 3 districts of Madhya Pradesh.
government funds.
The Programme has been equally focused
on interventions to enhance awareness
and impact behaviour change on WASH
through Community Led Total Sanitation
(CLTS) programmes to mobilise communities
to completely eliminate open defecation.
In addition, it targets direct beneficiary
contribution, loans and leveraging of
government funds under the Swachh Bharat
Abhiyan to construct toilets.
To make hygienic and healthy water
available to the local communities in
Nellore, Prakasam and Guntur districts,
Reverse Osmosis Water purification plants
were set up in villages where typically the
existing water source is of poor quality.
The water project employs a communitybased operating model involving the Village
Panchayat and the local communities. An
operational assistant is employed for each
Individual Household Toilets (IHHT) Spread and Trends
Uttarakhand,
644

Maharashtra, Himachal
171
Pradesh, 40
Madhya
Pradesh, 55

Tamil Nadu,
583

7,175

8000
6000

Karnataka,
957
Bihar, 905

3,578

4000

Telangana,
200

Andhra
Pradesh, 1,676

2000
0

283

275

352

10-11

11-12

12-13

829

13-14

14-15

15-16
155

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Solid Waste Management

ITC’s Waste
Recycling
programme,
‘WOW – Well
Being Out of
Waste’, covers
over 5 million
citizens,
500,000 school
children, 350
corporates,
more than 1,000
commercial
establishments
and around 200
industrial plants

156

ITC’s Waste Recycling programme, ‘WOW
– Well Being Out of Waste’, inculcates
the habit of source segregation and
recycling
among
school
children,
housewives and general public as well
as industries and business enterprises.
Its aim is to promote a clean and green
environment and providing a sustainable
source of livelihood for rag pickers and
waste collectors. The WOW movement
today extends to Hyderabad, Chennai,
Bengaluru, Coimbatore and some towns
of Telangana. The Programme covers
over 5 million citizens, 500,000 school
children, 350 corporates, more than 1,000
commercial establishments and around
200 industrial plants.
A novel pilot
programme, initially launched in twelve

selected wards of Bengaluru with the
support of Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara
Palike (BBMP), now covers 400 municipal
wards of major municipal corporations of
Southern India. The Programme creates
sustainable livelihoods for 10,000
rag pickers and waste collectors by
propagating source segregation at each of
the households and facilitating effective
collection mechanisms in collaboration
with municipal corporations. It has also
created over 50 social entrepreneurs for
sustaining the initiative.
Similar programmes are operational
in 9 districts of Saharanpur, Hooghly,
Kolkata, Munger, Guntur, Madurai, Pune,
Thiruvallur and Haridwar. The primary
focus is on door-to-door collection of
household waste against a household

Impact Evaluation of SWM Project in Saharanpur

A recently conducted independent study
of Saharanpur SWM programme shows
significant reduction of waste burden at
dumping sites, which is an outcome of
behavioural change in the communities.
The project has delivered well in improving
cleanliness, positively impacting air
quality and sanitation as per the surveyed

households, though source segregation
is still an area of improvement. There
was also zero open dumping of garbage
in the project area. The study also
recommended mechanisation along with
manual waste collection to cope up with
the increasing household base and burden
of waste.

Social Performance
Solid Waste Management Coverage
Particulars

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

2015-16

Households Covered

8,189

9,365

9,702

27,164

42,159

Total Waste Collected (MT)

1,076

1,498

2,201

2,717

3,975

Waste Composted (MT)

569

843

1,516

1,914

2,656

Waste Sold as Recyclable (MT)

332

371

380

385

397

16%

19%

14%

15%

23%

38.33

43.91

53.29

67.07

66.77

Waste going as Municipal
Dump(%)
Revenue (` lakhs)

levy, segregation at site in order to earned approximately `5.56 lakhs per
re-cycle and compost so as to minimise month as revenue which went towards
meeting part of the administration
the load at municipal landfills.
and overhead costs. Women-driven
The projects together covered over waste management initiatives were
42,000 households and handled 3,975 scaled up in Tribeni and Munger
MT of waste during the year. Only factory catchment in partnership
23% of the total waste collected is with cluster SHGs and respective
being dumped untreated. The Projects Gram Panchayats.

157

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Responsible
Advocacy

with the Government and policy makers
to promote sustainable development and
inclusive growth through corporate action.

ITC believes that it is necessary to
represent to and engage with authorities
on matters concerning the various
sectors in which it operates. The Board
approved Policy on Responsible Advocacy
provides the framework for the necessary
interface with Government/Regulatory
Authorities. ITC works with apex industry
institutions that are engaged in policy
advocacy, like the Confederation of Indian
Industry, Federation of Indian Chambers
of Commerce and Industry, Associated
Chambers of Commerce and Industry of
India and various other forums including
regional Chambers of Commerce. ITC’s
engagement with the relevant authorities
is guided by the values of commitment,
integrity, transparency and the need to
balance interests of diverse stakeholders.

Creating Enduring
Institutions

The Company, for its social development
projects, organises meetings with the local
administration and state governments to
seek their participation and involvement.
Their expert advice and counsel are also
sought and approvals obtained, where
required, for the planned interventions.
The Company also engages in publicprivate-partnerships (PPP) with the state
governments for such projects.

CII-ITC Centre of Excellence
for Sustainable Development
The CII-ITC Centre of Excellence for
Sustainable Development, established
by ITC in collaboration with the
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)
in 2006, continues its endeavours to
promote sustainable business practices
among Indian enterprises. The centre
is steered by its Advisory Council,
headed by Mr. Y C Deveshwar, Chairman,
ITC Limited, and comprises members from
industry, civil society and academia. The
Council provides strategic direction to
the organisation.

The Centre celebrated its tenth year with its
annual Sustainability Summit in September
2015. Experts and participants from across
the country deliberated on a wide range
of sustainability topics at the two-day
summit. The year also marked a decade of
the CII-ITC Sustainability Awards, instituted
to reward and recognise outstanding
contributions made by corporates in the field
of sustainability. Over the past 10 years, the
The CII-ITC Centre of Excellence for Awards have set benchmarks of excellence
Sustainable Development also interacts in sustainable business in India. Mr Suresh

158

Social Performance

Prabhu, Union Minister for Railways, gave Climate Change held in Paris in the winter
away the CII-ITC Sustainability Awards to 26 of 2015. The climate negotiations was of
great significance since a legally binding
winners across various categories in 2015.
agreement, which will become operational
On the International Day for Biological in 2020, was to be finalised at the event.
Diversity on May 22, the India Business & As India prepared for COP21, the Centre
Biodiversity Initiative (IBBI), launched by engaged with the MoEFCC on drafting India’s
the Centre in 2014, released the publication, Intended National Determined Contributions
‘Bridging Business and Biodiversity: (INDC). It mobilised inputs from key industry
Innovative Approaches’. The publication, segments, ensuring that industry was
released in association with the Union fully aligned with the Government on the
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate implementation of the INDCs.
Change (MoEFCC), highlights the concept of
natural capital and its relation to biodiversity The ITC Sangeet Research
and ecosystem services.
Academy
During the year, the Centre also launched
the Annual CSR Tracker, based on an analysis
of CSR disclosures of companies. The tracker
analysed 1,181 BSE-listed companies with
respect to the amount of funds spent, CSR
activities, geographical areas targeted and
committees & policies instituted. The Centre
also launched the Siemens Integrity Initiative
(SII), a project aimed at creating awareness
on responsible business practices.
The Centre continued to work with the
MoEFCC on various legislations and policies
concerning business and environment. It
provided inputs for the draft “Guidelines on
private sector participation for afforestation
on degraded forests land”, “Use of Multilayered packaging under Draft Plastic Waste
Management Rules 2015”, and the draft
Environment Laws Amendment Bill 2015.
The Centre participated in the 21st session
of the Conference of Parties (CoP) to the
United Nations Framework Convention on

The ITC Sangeet Research Academy
(ITC-SRA), which was established in 1977,
continues to be a true embodiment of ITC’s
sustained commitment to a priceless national
heritage. The Company’s pledge towards
ensuring enduring excellence in Classical
Music education has helped ITC-SRA adhere
to the age-old ‘Guru-Shishya Parampara’.
The Academy has eminent musicians
imparting quality Hindustani classical music
to its scholars. Its list of Gurus includes living
legends like Padma Vibhushan Vidushi Girija
Devi, Padma Bhushan Buddhadev Dasgupta,
Padma Shri Ulhas Kashalkar and Padma
Shri Ajoy Chakrabarty. The focus of the
Academy is on nurturing exceptionally gifted
students, carefully hand-picked across India,
who receive full scholarships to reside and
pursue music education in the Academy’s
campus. This has provided opportunities to
young talent to train under the tutelage of
the country’s most distinguished stalwarts
and has helped create the next generation of
musical masters.
159

Product
Responsibility
Management
Approach
Customer Health and Safety
Our uncompromising commitment in
providing world-class products and services
to satisfy customers on a consistent basis
is rooted in respect for our customers/
consumers. Given ITC’s presence in the
FMCG and Hospitality sectors, its products
and services reach out to a large number
of consumers. The Company has stringent
processes and systems to ensure that all
products and services are in compliance
with relevant regulatory requirements. In
addition, product and service attributes are
constantly evaluated against international
standards and best practices. This is an
integral part of the Company’s approach and
all efforts are made to ensure that there is no
deviation on this account.
160

ITC’s commitment towards ensuring
compliance with relevant standards of health
and safety commences at the design stage.
Appropriate health and safety elements
across procurement, manufacturing and
delivery are identified and evaluated, based
on which control measures are implemented
as necessary. Global developments in health
and safety are also reviewed constantly
to provide appropriate insights. This is
supported by comprehensive research and
testing facilities at the ITC Life Sciences
& Technology Centre, whose laboratories
conform to ISO/IEC 17025 and are certified
by National Accreditation Board for Testing
and Calibration (NABL). Manufacturing units
and hotels have state-of-the-art facilities
and technology as well as internationally
benchmarked quality management systems.
These are constantly reviewed to keep them
contemporary and relevant. The quality
performance of third party manufacturing
facilities is also monitored on a daily basis.

Social Performance
The summary of systems and initiatives across some of ITC’s Businesses is presented below:

Business

Measures undertaken

Agri
Business

The Business primarily engages in sourcing of agri-commodities like Wheat,
Coffee, Potato, Shrimps, Soya, Pulses, Rice, Maida and Processed Fruits. These
commodities are sourced and supplied based on customer requirements of quality,
quantity and packaging. Stringent process control and quality inspection norms
have been established to ensure compliance with customer requirements. Systems
and processes are in place to ensure the hygiene of the stored stocks. Products are
shipped after meticulous testing either in-house, or at accredited labs or agencies,
if required by the customers. For organic and sustainable farm practices in the
processed fruits business catering to specific customer segments, the Business has
received the following international certifications:
Fairtrade certification endorsing that its products meet certain environmental,
labour, and developmental standards.
Demeter Certification for Biodynamic Farming, a holistic method of agriculture.
USDA Organic and India Organic Certifications for Organic Farming.
Bio-Suisse Certification for Organic Farming.

Branded
Packaged Foods

63 out of 72 manufacturing locations, including third party manufacturing units,
which accounted for 93.3% of total production volume in 2015-16, are Hazard
Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP)/ISO 22000 certified, ensuring that
products use the best quality ingredients and utilise the highest quality processes.
The objective is to continuously provide consumers with products that not only “Taste
Good” but also “Do Good”. Consequently, large investments have been made in R&D
to deliver relevant functionalities based upon specific formulations for identified
health needs, like reducing salt, sugar and oil across all products. R&D team has
already come up with reduced fat biscuits and low sodium potato chips that have
undergone successful consumer research feedback and are ready for launch. None
of the Snacks products has added Trans Fat. Sucrose free products, wherein no
sucrose is added, to offer healthier alternatives have also been launched. Initiative
has been taken to replace refined wheat flour by whole wheat flour to make the
products healthier and new products are being developed incorporating healthier
multi grain cereals, wheat bran, wheat fibre, etc. Some of these developments are in
an advanced stage and will be launched in near future.

Cigarettes

The Business uses proprietary software to regularly monitor and review product
specifications of all raw materials. With consistent focus on product innovation, new
product development in the Business involves consideration of Indian and global
developments and is supported by comprehensive research and testing facilities at
the ITC Life Sciences & Technology Centre.

Leaf
Tobacco

Product integrity, quality and hygiene standards in tobacco cultivation are accorded
the highest importance. Accordingly, awareness among tobacco farmers on the
importance of sustainably producing residue-free quality tobacco is constantly
reinforced during field-level trainings and seminars in ITC’s operating regions. For
frequent assessment on product integrity, farm-level and packed-level toxicant
audit studies are undertaken wherein all leaf samples from farmlands and packed
cases of finished products are closely monitored for toxic residues. Several additional
measures were implemented across the value chain during the year towards
minimisation of Non Tobacco Related Matter.

161

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

162

Business

Measures undertaken

Personal Care
Products

The Business follows a comprehensive approach for improving the health and safety
impacts of its products in each of the life-cycle stages including R&D, certification as
well as manufacturing and production. All safety tests from prototype development
to final product are conducted in accordance with standard international guidelines.
Ingredients used in products undergo rigorous analysis, based on existing scientific
literature, for their toxicity and skin sensitisation prior to clearance for use in product
development. Product safety and efficacy are certified through external accredited
laboratories. Products are manufactured in a highly automated environment under
strict hygienic conditions. Documented Quality Management System, including
procured material checks, in-process checks and finished goods quality checks,
ensures that the manufactured products are consistent and of high quality.

Hotels

ITC Hotels have established food safety management systems certified as per
HACCP/ISO 22000. In addition, ITC Hotels R&D endeavours to adhere to GHP & GMP
(Good Hygiene Practices & Good Manufacturing Practices). The Hotels Business
also conforms to relevant applications of PAS 220 (Prerequisite programmes on
food safety for food manufacturing). ITC has elaborate fire safety guidelines which
all hotels comply with. These guidelines are based on National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) Codes and other international best practices. They supplement
the general EHS Guidelines applicable to all ITC Businesses, the compliance of which
is audited by the Corporate EHS Department on a regular basis.

Education and
Stationery
Products

The Business employs multiple process control measures through third party
certifications, inline and final quality checks across the entire chain of manufacturing
to ensure that their safety is not compromised. The Business uses only approved nonhazardous materials like Elemental Chlorine Free (ECF) paper, ink, dyes, etc. in the
note books. Since the primary consumers of these products are children, stringent
processes and quality control measures are in place to ensure their safety. Pencils
and art stationery items are in compliance with the European Standard EN 71.

Lifestyle
Retailing

All raw materials and garments are tested at the NABL accredited in-house laboratory
for post usage experience and conformance to quality standards. The standards and
product specifications are periodically validated by international testing agencies.
Quality is monitored through an internal Product Quality Rating System (PQRS)
together with the external Acceptable Quality Level (AQL) norm that is followed
internationally by apparel businesses. The Wills Lifestyle range (excluding the Wills
Signature garments) has received the “Oeko-Tex” certification (w.e.f. January 2012),
becoming the first brand in the domestic apparel retail segment in India to obtain
such a recognition. The certification has been conferred by Hohenstein Textile
Testing Institute GmbH & Co. KG, Germany. It guarantees that the products are free
from more than 100 harmful substances and ensures that Wills Lifestyle garments
are completely safe for consumers, without compromising on relevant style quotient
of its products.

Packaging
and Printing

Various initiatives have been undertaken in developing packaging solutions that
use environment friendly raw materials such as water-based varnishes and reduced
material usage in terms of mass and thickness of products. The Business engages
with customers on a continuous basis to provide solutions that help protect functional
needs like product integrity and visual imagery, whilst providing scope for use of
alternate materials. While the paperboard packaging is already being done with nontoluene based inks, the business encourages its customers for use of toluene-free
and ketone-free inks in flexible packaging. The Business has also been filing patents
related to operational excellence in packaging every year arising from high skill in
packaging design backed with state-of-the-art converting technology. In order to
strengthen the health & safety requirement of products (Quality and Hygiene), all key
operations at Haridwar and Tiruvottiyur factories have been certified as per British
Retail Consortium (BRC) Global Standard for Packaging and Packaging Material.

Social Performance

Business

Measures undertaken

Paperboards
and Specialty
Papers

ITC has been the pioneer in manufacturing Elemental Chlorine Free (ECF) pulp in
India. This ensures that the levels of dioxins and furans in the pulp are less than
1 PPT (Parts Per Trillion). The global migration test is conducted periodically on
all food-grade paper and paperboards for compliance with the US FDA standards
and to adhere to prescribed limits for presence of heavy metals. All manufacturing
ingredients for applications involving direct/indirect food contact are procured from
reputed suppliers and conform to US FDA and equivalent standards.
The Business ensures that the components of food allergens listed in the EC directive
2003/89/EC and the US FDA Act are not used in any virgin grade boards and papers.
All food-grade papers and paperboards are periodically tested for compliance with
European Regulation on Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of
Chemicals (REACH) and Restriction of Hazardous Substances (RoHS). The Bollaram
Unit and relevant production lines in Bhadrachalam Unit that manufacture food
grade board for direct/indirect food contact, are ‘third party’ certified in accordance
with BRC/IoP (British Retail Consortium/Institute of Packaging) standards.

Matches
and Agarbatti

Chemicals approved by IFRA (International Fragrance Resource Association, Geneva)
are used to prepare fragrances, which are required in the manufacture of dipped
Mangaldeep agarbattis. The manufacturing processes of the Matches and Agarbatti
Business are designed to ensure product safety and consistency.

Technico
Agri Sciences
Limited

Technico Agri Sciences Limited is in the Agricultural Bio-Technology business
of growing and selling TECHNITUBER® seed potatoes and field generated seed
potatoes. TECHNITUBER® seed potato technology is a scientifically advanced
process of producing large volumes of miniature seed potatoes from virus and
pathogen-free nucleus materials. Company’s facility to maintain germplasm of
seed potatoes has been accredited by the Department of Biotechnology, Ministry
of Science & Technology, Government of India and is regularly inspected by Central
Potato Research Institute (CPRI), Shimla. The Company follows Potato Tissue Culture
Raised Mini Tubers (PTCMT) standards for certification for TECHNITUBER® Seed
as well as early generation seed potatoes as laid down by Ministry of Agriculture,
Government of India.

163

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Product
Information and
Labelling

like email, telephone number, website address
and feedback forms to enable them to contact
the relevant Business. Processes are laid
down to ensure that consumers are provided
with responses on their feedback in a timely
manner. For food products, all information
ITC’s Business operations are committed about ingredients and nutrition of products
to comply with relevant laws of the is published on the product packaging as per
nation and systems are in place to ensure relevant statutory requirements.
compliance before the launch of any new
category or product.
In the Information Technology Business,
formal mechanisms are in place to measure
A regular customer feedback system forms customer experience. The Customer Service
an integral part of ITC’s Businesses where Satisfaction Survey is an annual check on the
there is direct interface with customers. The
robustness of the engagement, culminating
process followed by ITC’s Hotels Business
in a Customer Experience Index. The survey
with respect to consumer feedback is
is conducted amongst Chief Executives
illustrated below.
and Senior Management, and is based on
In the case of FMCG products, consumers are a structured questionnaire customised for
provided several communication channels the stakeholder. Multiple parameters and

Reports
Analysed

Monitored
and Verified

Improvements
Identified and
Implemented
Scores are generated
for the hotel and the
individual departments
Data is analysed
to identify areas of
improvement
Scores are
compared against
targets set
164

Scores are monitored
to ensure that
corrective action has
been effective

Audits are conducted
to check efficacy of
the changes

Social Performance
business outcomes are measured including
satisfaction, loyalty, advocacy and value
for money. The outcomes and insights from
the survey drive customer engagement and
service delivery improvement initiatives at
the organisation, geography, business unit
and account level.
Customer feedback for B2B businesses like
Agri Business and Packaging and Printing,
is obtained through different activities.
For example, Agri Business has pre-season
engagement with customers, client visits and
engagement of the Divisional Management
Committees with major customers. Given
the nature of the Business, claims due to
rejections on account of quality are a valuable
indicator of customer dissatisfaction. During
the year under review, no such claims were
made to the Business. Products sold by the
Agri Business division on a B2B basis are
labelled as per the customer requirements on
quality, shipping marks or importing country
labelling requirements. Business also
provides phytosanitary certificates, surveyor
quality and quantity reports, Chamber of
Commerce certificates, etc., as necessary.

Traceability in the Foods
Supply Chain
Board approved policies of ITC supplemented
by a ‘Code of Conduct for Vendors and
Service providers’ provide the structure
for addressing traceability within the

supply chain and also the sustainability
aspects therein, which are detailed in the
“Supply Chain” section of this Report. In
Foods Business, over 90% of the vendors
for processed raw materials like flavours,
seasoning, colour, emulsifier and other
special ingredients have already accepted
the ‘ITC Code of Conduct for Vendors and
Service providers’ demonstrating their
commitment to comply with applicable laws
and contribute to sustainable development.
In Foods Business, wheat constitutes around
49% of the total raw material procurement
value and is sourced through the e-Choupal
platform of ITC’s Agri Business thereby
ensuring 100% traceability to the origin.

Marketing
Communications
All Businesses/Divisions of ITC have
established rigorous systems, procedures
and review mechanisms to identify and
comply with the laws and regulations
concerning marketing communications. In
addition, ITC has put in place a dedicated
consumer response cell in order to answer
any queries on products.

A regular
customer
feedback
system forms an
integral part of
ITC’s Businesses
where there is
direct interface
with customers

165

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

ITC follows standard operating procedures
to ensure that its marketing communications
are in accordance with voluntary codes
adopted by each business as well as
applicable statutes. These are vetted by
the internal legal team and compliance is
ensured by the internal audit department.

ITC follows
standard
operating
procedures to
ensure that
its marketing
communications
are in
accordance with
voluntary codes
adopted by each
business as well
as applicable
statutes

166

Marketing and Advertising Communications
of all ITC’s Businesses are subjected to
stringent internal checks by the Legal
Department. The Company’s consumer
goods Businesses adhere to voluntary and
legal codes of conduct and follow the ASCI
(Advertising Standards Council of India)
Code for all marketing communications.
Marketing communications for ITC’s Hotels
Business is governed by self-regulation and
guided by the Indian Society of Advertisers
(ISA) rules and guidelines.

Customer Privacy

practices. The Business has drafted a privacy
policy in line with the IT Act, 2000, that covers
all aspects of data privacy with respect to
sensitive information. The Business has also
formulated an Information Management
policy, which caters to the IT security aspects
of the ISO 27001 ISMS framework. The IT
operations arm of ITC Infotech Limited is ISO
27001 certified for its business processes to
deliver IT services and projects. Documented
procedures are available and practised
to grant physical access to information,
e.g. the defined and restricted access rights
to IT Room/Server Room and User Access
Management based on ISO 27001 and as
agreed with customers. The Business has also
put in place measures at various control areas
in order to meet customers’ requirements for
data security. These include desktop access,
server access, network access, operating
system, application security, data transfer,
penetration testing, etc. Clear guidelines are
provided for data backup, retention periods,
the media on which backups have to be
maintained and storage at remote location.

Maintenance of customer privacy is relevant
primarily for ITC’s Information Technology
and Hotels Businesses, both of which have
well established systems and procedures for In addition, stringent risk assessments are
carried out to identify vulnerabilities and
ensuring zero non-compliance.
threats to assets and the controls that need
Network Architecture and Information to be put in place.
security controls of the Company’s
Information Technology Business under ITC ITC’s Hotels and Information Technology
Infotech Limited are driven by industry best Businesses received no complaints regarding

Social Performance

The Road Ahead

breach of customer privacy or loss of
customer data in 2015-16. For the year the
average WoW Ratio (Guest Satisfaction Recognising the unique construct of ITC in
Index) for the Hotels Business was 90.34%. terms of its strong presence in agriculture,
Branded Packaged Foods and Personal Care
Products Businesses, a convergence of R&D
capabilities is being leveraged to deliver
All Businesses/Divisions of ITC have well future products aimed at nutrition, health
established systems, procedures and review and well-being. In this context, Life Sciences
mechanisms to identify and comply with the & Technology Centre (LSTC) has established
laws and regulations concerning its products a Biosciences R&D team to design and
and services. Particular care is accorded to develop
several
long-term
research
tobacco products, taking into account the platforms evolving multi-generation product
concepts and associated claims that are
regulatory framework.
fully backed by scientific evidence for the
ITC has established systems wherein every Branded Packaged Foods and Personal
Business and Corporate Department has to Care Products Businesses. Multiple value
submit a periodic statutory compliance report propositions have been identified in the
to the CMC/Board on all business regulatory, area of functional foods, which are being
product specific, finance/revenue related, progressed to products of the future with
personnel related, technical/process related strong scientifically validated claims via
and environment related statutes and other clinical trials. Similar advances have been
applicable laws and regulations. This is done made in the area of personal care products.
on the basis of updated checklists that have to In addition, LSTC has evolved a strategy in
be mandatorily maintained by each reporting building a new value chain called, ‘Nutrition’
Unit/Business/function as well as monitoring with a special focus on ‘Indianness’ and
and control systems that the Business/ ‘health and well-being’ founded on the
basis of Value Added Agriculture (VAA)
Corporate function must have in place.
and Medicinal and Aromatic Plants. The
As per this system, no incidents of non- initial activities related to VAA have already
commenced with a focus on soya.
compliance were reported during 2015-16.

Compliance

Recognising
the unique
construct of ITC
in terms of its
strong presence
in agriculture,
Branded
Packaged Foods
and Personal
Care Products
Businesses, a
convergence of
R&D capabilities
is being
leveraged to
deliver future
products aimed
at nutrition,
health and
well-being

167

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

GRI-G4
Content Index
UNGC - COP #
Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures

Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

General Standard Disclosures
Indicator

Description

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Section
Reference

STRATEGY AND ANALYSIS

G4-1

Statement from the most
senior decision-maker of
the organisation about the
relevance of sustainability
to the organisation and the
organisation’s strategy for
addressing sustainability

Statement of
continuing support

04-09

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

G4-2

Description of key impacts,
risks, and opportunities

*

34-42

-

-

ORGANISATIONAL PROFILE

168

G4-3

Name of the organisation

*

12

-

-

G4-4

Primary brands, products, and
services

*

14-21

-

-

G4-5

Location of the organisation’s
headquarters

*

46

-

-

G4-6

Number of countries where
the organisation operates

*

12

-

-

G4-7

Nature of ownership and legal
form

*

Report and
Accounts 2016

-

-

G4-8

Markets served

*

12

-

-

G4-9

Scale of the organisation

*

12

-

-

G4-10

Details on workforce broken
down by gender, employment
contract, employment type
etc.

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 6

126

-

-

G4-11

Percentage of total employees
covered by collective
bargaining agreements

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 3

126

-

-

GRI-G4 Content Index

GRI - G4 Disclosures
General Standard Disclosures

UNGC - COP #
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

Indicator

Description

G4-12

Description of the
organisation’s supply chain

*

22-25

-

-

G4-13

Significant changes during
the reporting period
regarding the organisation’s
size, structure, ownership, or
its supply chain

*

12-25

-

-

G4-14

How the precautionary
approach or principle is
addressed by the organisation

Actions taken
to implement
Principle 7

58-59

-

-

G4-15

Externally developed
economic, environmental and
social charters, principles, or
other initiatives to which the
organisation subscribes or
which it endorses

United Nations
Global Compact
(UNGC) - This
Sustainability
Report is used
to communicate
progress on
implementation of
UNGC Principles

04

-

-

G4-16

Memberships of associations
and national/international
advocacy organisations in
which the organisation holds
a position on the governance
body and participates in
projects or committees

*

191-192

-

-

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

IDENTIFIED MATERIAL ASPECTS AND BOUNDARIES

G4-17

Entities included in the
organisation’s consolidated
financial statements with
indication of coverage in
the report

G4-18

Process for defining the
report content and the
Aspect Boundaries

G4-19

Material Aspects identified
in the process for defining
report content

G4-20

Description of Aspect
Boundary within the
organisation for each material
aspect

*

*

*

*

46-51

43

44-45

46-49

169

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

UNGC - COP #
Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures

Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

General Standard Disclosures
Indicator

Description

G4-21

Description of Aspect
Boundary outside the
organisation for each material
aspect

G4-22

Explanation of the effect
of any re-statement of
information provided in the
earlier Reports

G4-23

Significant changes from
previous reporting periods in
the Scope and
Aspect Boundaries

*

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

31-32

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

22-23, 30-33
46-47, 83, 87-88,
91, 93, 101-102,
112

*

*

91

46-49

STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT

G4-24

List of stakeholder groups
engaged by the organisation

Sharing COP with
Stakeholders

G4-25

Basis for identification and
selection of stakeholders with
whom to engage

Sharing COP with
Stakeholders

G4-26

Organisation’s approach to
stakeholder engagement

G4-27

Key topics and concerns that
have been raised through
stakeholder engagement,
and how the organisation
has responded to those key
topics and concerns

Sharing COP with
Stakeholders

Sharing COP with
Stakeholders

31-32

30-31

30-32

REPORT PROFILE

170

G4-28

Reporting Period

*

46

-

-

G4-29

Date of most recent previous
Report

*

46

-

-

G4-30

Reporting cycle

*

46

-

-

G4-31

Contact point for questions
regarding the report or its
contents

*

46

-

-

GRI-G4 Content Index

GRI - G4 Disclosures

UNGC - COP #
Elements

Indicator

Description

Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

G4-32

GRI Content Index

*

168-187

-

-

G4-33

Organisation’s policy and
current practice with regard
to seeking external assurance
for the report; relationship
with the assurance providers;
the highest governance
body’s involvement in seeking
assurance
for the organisation’s
sustainability report

*

47

-

-

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

General Standard Disclosures

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

GOVERNANCE

G4-34

Governance structure of the
organisation; committees
responsible for decisionmaking on economic,
environmental and
social impacts

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

G4-35

Process for delegating
authority for economic,
environmental and social
topics from the highest
governance body to senior
executives and other
employees

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

G4-36

Executive-level positions with
responsibility for economic,
environmental and
social topics

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

G4-37

Processes for consultation
between stakeholders and
the highest governance body
on economic, environmental
and social topics

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

G4-38

Composition of the highest
governance body and its
committees

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

G4-39

Function of the Chair of the
highest governance body
within the organisation’s
management and the reasons
for his arrangement as an
executive officer

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

52-55

54-55

52-55

54-55

54-55

55

171

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

GRI - G4 Disclosures
General Standard Disclosures

Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

Indicator

Description

G4-40

Nomination and selection
processes for the highest
governance body and its
committees; the criteria used
for nominating and selecting
highest governance
body members

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

G4-41

Processes for the highest
governance body to ensure
conflicts of interest are
avoided and managed;
disclosure of conflicts of
interest to stakeholders

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

G4-42

Highest governance body’s and
senior executives’ roles in the
development, approval, and
updating of the organisation’s
purpose, value or mission
statements, strategies, policies,
and goals related to economic,
environmental and
social impacts

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

G4-43

Measures taken to develop
and enhance the highest
governance body’s collective
knowledge of economic,
environmental and
social topics

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

G4-44

Processes for evaluation
of the highest governance
body’s performance with
respect to governance of
economic, environmental and
social topics; actions taken in
response to evaluation results

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

G4-45

G4-46

172

UNGC - COP #
Elements

Highest governance body’s
role in the identification
and management of
economic, environmental
and social impacts, risks, and
opportunities; use of
stakeholder consultation for
supporting the process
Highest governance body’s
role in reviewing the
effectiveness of
the organisation’s risk
management processes for
economic, environmental and
social topics

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

Page Number/
Explanation

53-55

55-56

54-55

56-57

56-57

58-59

58-59

Omissions

External
Assurance

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

GRI-G4 Content Index

GRI - G4 Disclosures
General Standard Disclosures

UNGC - COP #
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

Indicator

Description

G4-47

Frequency of the highest
governance body’s review
of economic, environmental
and social impacts, risks,
and opportunities

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

Once in a quarter

G4-48

Highest committee or position
that formally reviews and
approves the organisation’s
sustainability report and
ensures that all material
Aspects are covered

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

43
54-55

G4-49

Process for communicating
critical concerns to the
highest governance body

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

43

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

G4-50

Nature and total number of
critical concerns that were
communicated to the
highest governance body and
the mechanism(s) used to
address and resolve them

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

32-42

-

-

G4-51

Remuneration policies for
the highest governance body
and senior executives; how
performance criteria in the
remuneration policy relate
to the highest governance
body’s and senior executives’
economic, environmental
and social objectives

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

57

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

G4-52

Process for determining
remuneration

*

57

-

-

G4-53

How stakeholders’ views
are sought and taken
into account regarding
remuneration

*

Report and
Accounts 2016

-

-

G4-54

Ratio of the annual total
compensation for the
organisation’s highest-paid
individual to the median
annual total compensation
for all employees (excluding
the highest-paid individual)

*

57

-

-

G4-55

Ratio of percentage increase
in annual total compensation
for the organisation’s
highest-paid individual to the
median percentage increase
in annual total compensation
for all employees (excluding
the highest-paid individual)

*

57

-

-

173

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

GRI - G4 Disclosures
General Standard Disclosures
Indicator

Description

UNGC - COP #
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

ETHICS AND INTEGRITY

G4-56

Organisation’s values,
principles, standards and
norms of behaviour such as
codes of conduct and codes
of ethics

Actions taken
to implement
principles 10

G4-57

Internal and external
mechanisms for seeking
advice on ethical and lawful
behaviour, and matters
related to organisational
integrity

Actions taken
to implement
principles 10

57-58

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

G4-58

Internal and external
mechanisms for reporting
concerns about unethical or
unlawful behaviour,
and matters related to
organisational integrity

Actions taken
to implement
principles 10

57-58

-

-

Omissions

External
Assurance

57
189

SPECIFIC STANDARD DISCLOSURES - MATERIAL ASPECTS
DMA
and
Indicators

Description

Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

CATEGORY: ECONOMIC
MATERIAL ASPECT: ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE

174

G4-DMA

Generic Disclosures on
Management Approach (DMA)

*

62

-

-

G4-EC1

Direct economic value
generated and distributed

*

63-67

-

-

GRI-G4 Content Index

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
- Material Aspects
Indicator

Description

UNGC - COP #
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

-

G4-EC2

Financial implications and
other risks and opportunities
for the organisation’s
activities due to
climate change

Action taken on
Principle 7

-

Evaluation
of financial
implications
of the risk and
opportunities
due to climate
change is
in progress.
This will be
reported as
part of 2016
Climate
Change
Questionnaire
of Carbon
Disclosure
Project (CDP),
which will be
available on
their website
in October
2016.

G4-EC3

Coverage of the
organisation’s defined benefit
plan obligations

*

69

-

-

G4-EC4

Financial assistance received
from government

*

68

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: INDIRECT ECONOMIC IMPACTS
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

*

70-71

-

-

G4-EC7

Development and impact of
infrastructure investments
and services supported

*

71

-

-

G4-EC8

Significant indirect economic
impacts, including the extent
of impacts

*

138-157

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: PROCUREMENT PRACTICES
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

*

67-68

-

-

G4-EC9

Proportion of spending on
local suppliers

*

67-68

-

175

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

UNGC - COP #
Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
- Material Aspects
Indicator

Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

Description

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

CATEGORY: ENVIRONMENTAL
G4-DMA

Generic Disclosures on
Management Approach
(DMA)

Actions taken
principles 7, 8, 9

74-75

-

-

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: MATERIALS
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
principles 7,8

G4-EN1

Materials used by weight or
volume

Outcomes from
Principle 7,8

115-116

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

G4-EN2

Percentage of materials
used that are recycled input
materials

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8

115-116

-

-

-

-

114-115

MATERIAL ASPECT: ENERGY
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
principles 7,8,9

G4-EN3

Energy consumption within
the organisation

Outcomes from
Principle 7,8

78-82

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

G4-EN4

Energy consumption outside
of the organisation

Outcomes from
Principle 8

83

-

-

G4-EN5

Energy intensity

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

G4-EN6

Reduction of energy
consumption

Outcomes from
Principle 8,9

81

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

G4-EN7

Reductions in energy
requirements of products and
services

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8,9

81-82

-

-

-

-

76-77

82

MATERIAL ASPECT: WATER
G4-DMA
176

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
principles 7,8

94-95

GRI-G4 Content Index

UNGC - COP #
Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
- Material Aspects
Indicator

Description

Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

G4-EN8

Total water withdrawal by
source

Outcomes from
Principle 7,8

96

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

G4-EN9

Water sources significantly
affected by withdrawal of
water

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8

101-103

-

-

G4-EN10

Percentage and total volume
of water recycled and reused

Outcomes from
Principle 8

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

-

Page Number/
Explanation

102

Omissions

External
Assurance

MATERIAL ASPECT: BIODIVERSITY
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Operational sites owned,
leased, managed in, or
G4-EN11 adjacent to, protected areas
and areas of high biodiversity
value outside protected areas

Actions taken
to implement
principles 8

118-119

-

-

G4-EN12

Description of significant
impacts of activities,
products, and services on
biodiversity in protected
areas and areas of high
biodiversity value outside
protected areas

-

-

G4-EN13

Habitats protected or
restored

-

-

-

-

Total number of IUCN Red
List species and national
conservation list species with
G4-EN14
habitats in areas affected
by operations, by level of
extinction risk

None of ITC’s
operational
sites are
owned, leased,
managed in, or
are adjacent
to, protected
areas and
areas of high
biodiversity
value,
therefore,
these are not
applicable.

-

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: EMISSIONS
G4-DMA

G4-EN15

Aspect-specific DMA

Direct greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions (Scope 1)

Actions taken
to implement
principles 7,8,9

Outcomes from
Principle 7,8

84-85

87-88

-

-

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement;
Independent
Assurance
Statement
on GHG
Inventory
177

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
- Material Aspects
Indicator

G4-EN16

G4-EN17

G4-EN18

Description

Energy indirect greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions
(Scope 2)

Other indirect greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions
(Scope 3)

Greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions intensity

UNGC - COP #
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 7,8

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 7,8

Outcomes on
Principle 8

Outcomes on
Principle 8,9

G4-EN19

Reduction of greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions

G4-EN20

Emissions of ozone-depleting
substances (ODS)

Outcomes on
Principle 7,8

G4-EN21

NOX, SOX, and other
significant air emissions

Outcomes on
Principle 7,8

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement;
Independent
Assurance
Statement
on GHG
Inventory

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement;
Independent
Assurance
Statement
on GHG
Inventory

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement;
Independent
Assurance
Statement
on GHG
Inventory

88

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement;
Independent
Assurance
Statement
on GHG
Inventory

93

-

-

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

-

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

87-88

87-88

90

91-92

MATERIAL ASPECT: EFFLUENTS AND WASTE

178

G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
principles 8

G4-EN22

Total water discharge by
quality and destination

Outcomes from
principle 8

104-106

98-100

GRI-G4 Content Index

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
- Material Aspects

UNGC - COP #
Elements

Indicator

Description

Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

G4-EN23

Total weight of waste by type
and disposal method

Outcomes from
principle 8

107-110

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

G4-EN24

Total number and volume of
significant spills

Outcomes from
principle 8

93

-

-

Outcomes from
implementing
principle 8

-

This standard
disclosure is
not applicable
as there was
no transport,
import, export
or treatment of
waste deemed
hazardous
under the terms
of the Basel
Convention
Annex I, II, III
and VIII.

-

Outcomes from
implementing
principle 8

101-103

-

-

81

-

-

-

We have used
1,13,213
Tonnes of
post-consumer
waste paper/
paperboard
which
contributed to
19% of total
fiber demand of
our Paperboards
and Specialty
Papers Business.
However, we
are not able to
correlate the
post-consumer
waste coming
from the
consumers of
our products.

-

Weight of transported,
imported, exported, or treated
waste deemed hazardous
under the terms of the Basel
G4-EN25
Convention Annex I, II, III,
and VIII, and percentage of
transported waste shipped
internationally

Identity, size, protected
status, and biodiversity value
of water bodies and related
G4-EN26
habitats signifcantly
affected by the organisation’s
discharges of water and
runoff

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

MATERIAL ASPECT: PRODUCTS AND SERVICES
G4-EN27

G4-EN28

Extent of impact mitigation
of environmental impacts of
products and services

Percentage of products
sold and their packaging
materials that are reclaimed
by category

Outcomes from
implementing
Principles 7,8,9

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8

179

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

UNGC - COP #
Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
- Material Aspects
Indicator

Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

Description

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

MATERIAL ASPECT: SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT
DMA

Actions taken
to implement
principles 7,8,9

Aspect-specific DMA

114-115, 117,
118-119

-

-

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

-

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: COMPLIANCE

G4-EN29

Monetary value of significant
fines and total number of
non-monetary sanctions
for non-compliance with
environmental laws and
regulations

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8

167

MATERIAL ASPECT: TRANSPORT

G4-EN30

Significant environmental
impacts of transporting
products and other goods
and materials for the
organisation’s operations,
and transporting members of
the workforce

Outcomes from
implementing
Principles 8

87-88
91

CATEGORY: SOCIAL
Sub-Category:
LABOUR PRACTICES AND DECENT WORK
MATERIAL ASPECT: EMPLOYMENT

180

G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
Principle
3,4,5,6

G4-LA1

Total number and rates of
new employee hires and
employee turnover by age
group, gender and region

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 6

126-127

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

G4-LA2

Benefits provided to fulltime employees that are not
provided to temporary or
part-time employees,
by significant locations of
operation

-

127-129

-

-

G4-LA3

Return to work and retention
rates after parental leave, by
gender

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 6

126

-

-

124-125

GRI-G4 Content Index

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
- Material Aspects
Indicator

Description

UNGC - COP #
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

MATERIAL ASPECT: LABOUR/MANAGEMENT RELATIONS

G4-LA4

Minimum notice periods
regarding operational
changes, including whether
these are specified in
collective agreements

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 3

Minimum
notice periods
regarding
operational
changes
form part of
long-term
agreements
with employees.

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

-

132-133

-

-

G4-LA5

Percentage of total workforce
represented in formal joint
management-worker health
and safety committees that
help monitor and advise on
occupational health and
saftey programs

*

133

-

-

G4-LA6

Type of injury and rates of
injury, occupational diseases,
lost days, and absenteeism,
and total number of workrelated fatalities

*

133-136

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

G4-LA7

Workers with high incidence
or high risk of diseases
related to their occupation

*

137

-

-

G4-LA8

Health and safety topics
covered in formal agreements
with trade unions

*

133

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: TRAINING AND EDUCATION

G4-LA9

Average hours of training per
year per employee by gender,
and by employee category

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 6

129-130

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

G4-LA10

Programs for skills
management and lifelong
learning that support the
continued employability of
employees and assist them in
managing career endings

*

129-130

-

-

181

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

UNGC - COP #
Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
- Material Aspects
Indicator

Description

G4-LA11

Percentage of employees
receiving regular
performance and career
development reviews, by
gender and by employee
category

Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 6

129-130

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: DIVERSITY AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
Composition of governance
bodies and breakdown of
employees per employee
G4-LA12 category according to gender,
age group, minority group
membership, and other
indicators of diversity

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 6

54, 131

-

-

Actions taken
to implement
Principles 1,2,4,5

124-125
130-131

-

-

-

-

Sub-Category:
HUMAN RIGHTS
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

MATERIAL ASPECT: NON-DISCRIMINATION
G4-HR3

Total number of incidents of
discrimination and corrective
actions taken

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 6

131

MATERIAL ASPECT: FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION AND COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

G4-HR4

Operations and suppliers
identified in which the
right to exercise freedom of
association and collective
bargaining may be violated
or at significant risk, and
measures taken to support
these rights

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 3

124-125
131

-

-

131

-

-

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: CHILD LABOUR

G4-HR5

182

Operations and suppliers
identified as having
significant risk for incidents
of child labour, and measures
taken to contribute to the
effective abolition of child
labour

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 5

131

GRI-G4 Content Index

UNGC - COP #
Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
- Material Aspects
Indicator

Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

Description

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

MATERIAL ASPECT: FORCED OR COMPULSORY LABOUR

G4-HR6

Operations and suppliers
identified as having
significant risk for incidents
of forced or compulsory
labour, and measures to
contribute to the elimination
of all forms of forced or
compulsory labour

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 4

131

-

-

-

-

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

Sub-Category:
SOCIETY
MATERIAL ASPECT: LOCAL COMMUNITIES
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions to
implement
Principles 1

G4-SO1

Percentage of operations
with implemented local
community engagement,
impact assessments, and
development programs

Outcomes of
implementation of
Principle 1

G4-SO2

Operations with significant
actual and potential negative
impacts on local communities

Outcomes of
implementation of
Principle 1

138-141

143-157

143-157

MATERIAL ASPECT: ANTI-CORRUPTION
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
Principle 10

57-59

-

-

G4-SO3

Total number and percentage
of operations assessed for
risks related to corruption
and the significant risks
identified

Outcomes of
implementation of
Principle 10

57-59

-

-

G4-SO4

Communication and training
on anti-corruption policies
and procedures

Outcomes of
implementation of
Principle 10

57-59

-

-

G4-SO5

Confirmed incidents of
corruption and actions taken

Outcomes of
implementation of
Principle 10

57-59

-

-

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: PUBLIC POLICY

G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
Principle 10

158

183

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

UNGC - COP #
Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
- Material Aspects
Indicator

Description

Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

G4-SO6

Total value of political
contributions by country and
recipient/beneficiary

Outcomes of
implementation of
Principle 10

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

Nil

-

-

-

-

-

-

MATERIAL ASPECT: ANTI-COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOUR

G4-SO7

Total number of legal
actions for anti-competitive
behaviour, anti-trust and
monopoly practices and their
outcomes

*

167

MATERIAL ASPECT: COMPLIANCE

G4-SO8

Monetary value of significant
fines and total number of
non-monetary sanctions for
non-compliance with laws
and regulations

*

167

Sub-Category:
PRODUCT RESPONSIBILITY
MATERIAL ASPECT: CUSTOMER HEALTH AND SAFETY
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

*

160, 167

-

-

G4-PR1

Percentage of significant
product and service
categories for which health
and safety impacts are
assessed for
improvement

*

161-163

-

-

G4-PR2

Total number of incidents
of non-compliance with
regulations and voluntary
codes concerning the
health and safety impacts of
products and services during
their life cycle, by type of
outcomes

*

167

-

-

-

-

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

MATERIAL ASPECT: PRODUCT AND SERVICE LABELLING

184

G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

G4-PR3

Type of product and service
information required by the
organisation’s procedures
for product and service
information and labelling,
and percentage of significant
product and service
categories subject to such
information requirements

*

*

164-165

164-165

GRI-G4 Content Index

UNGC - COP #
Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
- Material Aspects

Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

Indicator

Description

G4-PR4

Total number of incidents
of non-compliance with
regulations and voluntary
codes concerning product
and service information and
labelling, by type of outcomes

G4-PR5

Results of surveys measuring
customer satisfaction

*

*

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

165-167

-

-

166-167

-

-

-

-

-

-

167

164-165

MATERIAL ASPECT: MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
G4-PR6

Sale of banned or disputed
products

G4-PR7

Total number of incidents
of non-compliance with
regulations and voluntary
codes concerning marketing
communications, including
advertising, promotion,
and sponsorship, by type of
outcomes

*

MATERIAL ASPECT: CUSTOMER PRIVACY

G4-PR8

Total number of substantiated
complaints regarding
breaches of customer privacy
and losses of customer data

*

166

MATERIAL ASPECT: COMPLIANCE

G4-PR9

Monetary value of significant
fines for non-compliance with
laws and regulations
concerning the provision and
use of products and services

*

167

* No direct requirement by UNGC - COP
# UNGC - COP - United Nations Global Compact - Communication of progress

185

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

GRI-G4 Food
Processing Sector
Supplement (FPSS)
Material
Aspects DMAs and
Indicators

Description

Page Number/
Explanation

Reasons for
Omissions

External
Assurance

Aspect: Procurement / Sourcing Practices - Disclosure on Management Approach (DMA)
DMA

Protecting Natural
Resources

74-75

-

-

DMA

Minimising Toxicity

114-117, 160-163

-

-

DMA

Fair Trade

All of ITC’s trading
partnerships
are conducted
in compliance
with applicable
legislations

-

-

DMA

Fair Compensation for
Labour

127-128

-

-

DMA

Traceability

165

-

-

Aspect: Procurement / Sourcing Practices - Disclosure on Management Approach (DMA)

DMA

Genetically Modified
Organisms (GMOs)

ITC Foods Business
does not use
any GMOs in
manufacturing its
products

DMA

Biofuels

76-77, 83

-

-

-

-

Aspect: Procurement / Sourcing Practices – Indicators

186

FP1

Percentage of purchased
volume from suppliers
compliant with
company’s sourcing
policy

Partially reported
22-23, 165

FP2

Percentage of purchased
volume which is
verified as being
in accordance with
credible, internationally
recognised responsible
production standards,
broken down by standard

Partially reported
22-23, 165

Reporting on energy, GHG
emissions, water and waste
performance of Foods Business
third party manufacturing units
(TPMs) is intended to be done in a
progressive manner.
We had planned to include the
performance of the joint venture
North Eastern Nutrients Private
Limited (NENPL) in Sustainability
Report 2016. However, this
could not be done due to plant
commissioning and stabilisation
activities in 2015-16. It is proposed
to include the material aspects of
NENPL within next 2 years.

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

GRI-G4 Food Processing Sector Supplement
Material Aspects
- DMAs and
Indicators

Description

Page Number/
Explanation

Reasons for
Omissions

External
Assurance

-

-

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

-

-

-

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

-

Aspect: Labour/Management Relations
DMA

FP3

124-125
Percentage of working time lost due
to industrial disputes, strikes and/or
lock-outs by country

126

Aspect: Healthy and Affordable Food

DMA

Nature, scope and effectiveness of any
programmes and practices
that promote access to healthy
lifestyles; the prevention of chronic
disease; access to healthy, nutritious
and affordable food; and improved
welfare for communities in need

160-161

Aspect: Customer Health and Safety
DMA

160-161

FP5

Percentage of production volume
manufactured in sites certified by an
independent third party according
to internationally recognised food
safety management system standards

FP6

Percentage of total sales volume
of consumer products, by product
category, that are lowered in saturated
fat, trans fats, sodium and sugars

FP7

Percentage of total sales volume
of consumer products, by product
category sold, that contain
increased fiber, vitamins, minerals,
phytochemicals
or functional food additives

161

161

161

Aspect: Product and Service Labelling

DMA

Policies and practices on
communication to consumers
about ingredients and nutritional
information beyond legal requirements

164

Aspect: Animal Welfare
Not material as none of our businesses are involved in activities related to animal welfare

187

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Alignment to Business
Responsibility Report Principles
Linking Sustainability Report 2016 to Business Responsibility Report Principles to assess compliance with
Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) norms.
Principle

1

188

Business Responsibility Report
Principles to assess compliance with
ESG norms

Businesses should conduct and
govern themselves with Ethics,
Transparency and Accountability

Coverage in Section of Sustainability Report 2016

Governance Structure

2

Businesses should provide goods and
services that are safe and contribute
to sustainability throughout their
life-cycle

Energy
Air Emissions
Water Management
Waste Management
Raw Materials
Supply Chain
ITC’s Mission Sunehra Kal for Sustainable
& Inclusive Growth
Product Responsibility

3

Businesses should promote the wellbeing of all employees

Labour Practices & Decent Work and Human Rights
Occupational Health and Safety

4

Businesses should respect the
interests of, and be responsive
towards all stakeholders, especially
those who are disadvantaged,
vulnerable and marginalised

5

Businesses should respect and
promote human rights

Economic Performance
Stakeholder Engagement, Risk & Opportunities and
Materiality Analysis
Labour Practices & Decent Work and Human Rights
ITC’s Mission Sunehra Kal for Sustainable
& Inclusive Growth
Labour Practices & Decent Work and Human Rights
Energy
Air Emissions
Water Management
Waste Management
Raw Materials
Biodiversity
ITC’s Mission Sunehra Kal for Sustainable
& Inclusive Growth

6

Business should respect, protect,
and make efforts to restore the
environment

7

Businesses, when engaged in
influencing public and regulatory
policy, should do so in a responsible
manner

Responsible Policy Advocacy
Stakeholder Engagement, Risk & Opportunities and
Materiality Analysis
Memberships and Affiliations

8

Businesses should support inclusive
growth and equitable development

Economic Performance
ITC’s Mission Sunehra Kal for Sustainable
& Inclusive Growth

9

Businesses should engage with and
provide value to their customers and
consumers in a responsible manner

Stakeholder Engagement, Risk & Opportunities and
Materiality Analysis
Product Responsibility

Annexure

Annexure

ITC’s Vision, Mission, Core Values and
Policies & Guidelines
ITC’s Vision
Sustain ITC’s position as one of India’s most valuable corporations through world-class
performance, creating growing value for the Indian economy and the Company’s stakeholders.

ITC’s Mission
To enhance the wealth generating capability of the enterprise in a globalising environment,
delivering superior and sustainable stakeholder value.

ITC’s Core Values
ITC’s Core Values are aimed at developing a customer-focussed, high-performance
organisation which creates values for all its stakeholders. ITC’s Core Values encompass the
principles of Trusteeship, Customer Focus, Respect for People, Excellence, Innovation and
Nation Orientation. Please check the following link for details:
http://www.itcportal.com/about-itc/values/core-values.aspx

Corporate Governance at ITC
http://www.itcportal.com/about-itc/values/corporate-governance.aspx
ITC’s Code of Conduct and Policies are available at the Company’s corporate website
www.itcportal.com. Please check the following links for details:

ITC’s Code of Conduct
http://www.itcportal.com/about-itc/values/code-of-conduct.aspx

ITC’s Sustainability Policies
http://www.itcportal.com/about-itc/policies/sustainability-policy.aspx

ITC’s CSR Policy
http://www.itcportal.com/about-itc/policies/corporate-social-responsibility-policy.aspx

ITC’s Food Products Policy
http://www.itcportal.com/about-itc/policies/itc-food-product-policy.aspx

ITC’s E-Waste Policy
http://www.itcportal.com/about-itc/policies/itc-it-e-waste-policy.aspx

189

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Annexure

Quantification Methodologies: Energy
and GHG Emissions
To set organisational boundaries for consolidated GHG
emissions, ITC has utilised the operational control
approach for the various entities covered under the
Report. ITC’s accounting of Scope 1, 2 & 3 GHG emissions
is based on the ‘GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and
Reporting Standard’ and the ‘GHG Protocol Corporate
Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting
Standard’ issued by the World Resources Institute
(WRI) and the World Business Council for Sustainable
Development (WBCSD).

Efficiency Study (India)–2005. Emission factors for
employee commuting by means of company owned/
hired vehicles and transportation due to guest pick-up in
ITC Hotels are based on a report by Automotive Research
Association of India.
Rail – Emission factors are calculated based on the
information available from the Indian Railways Annual
report 2013-14, Indian Railways Statistics 2013-14.

Air/Ship – “Guidelines to DEFRA/DECC’s GHG Conversion
Factors for Company Reporting – Freight Transport 2011”
1. Stationary Combustion
developed by the Department of Energy and Climate
Emission factors provided in the IPCC Guideline for National Change (DECC) and the Department for Environment,
Greenhouse Gas Inventories of 2006 were used to calculate Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA), U.K.
GHG emissions from stationary combustion sources.
Activity data (quantity of fuel consumed) is multiplied
with the respective default energy factor or actual
measured Net Calorific Value (NCVs) to arrive at the
energy consumption values, which is multiplied by the
emission factor to quantify the direct emission from
stationary combustion sources.

4. Minor Sources

The quantification of GHG emissions from minor* sources
is based on a robust process of data collection at Unit/
Division level and emission factors taken from recognised
global sources, such as IPCC guidelines and assessment
reports; GHG Protocol HFC Tool v10 developed by GHG
Protocol initiative, WRI & WBCSD; Pulp and Paper Tool2005; UNFCCC approved methodologies. The sources
2. Purchased Energy
that have a minor contribution to ITC’s overall GHG
The quantification of indirect GHG emission due to emissions are listed below:
purchased electricity is based on activity data (Electricity
consumption in kWh) multiplied by emission factors 1. Air-conditioning
specified in the ‘CO2 Baseline Database for the Indian Power
2. Process Emissions
Sector User Guide’, (version 10.0, December 2014) issued by
3. Company owned vehicles
Central Electricity Authority, Government of India.
4. SF6 release from power distribution system
The quantification of indirect GHG emissions for
purchased steam is based on activity data (energy 5. CO2 release from fire protection system
consumption in GJ) multiplied by the applicable 6. Gas cutting/ welding
emission factors provided in the IPCC Guideline for
7. Waste water treatment
National Greenhouse Gas Inventories of 2006.

3. Transportation

8. GHG emissions from composting of waste inside
the unit premises

The energy consumption outside of the organisation 9. GHG emissions from fertiliser application in
forestry project
due to road transportation is quantified by using energy
conversion factors based on the Report by World Bank on 10. GHG emissions due to employee air travel
Road Transport Service Efficiency Study (India)–2005.
The modes of transportation used in ITC, for raw materials,
finished goods & wastes, employee commuting by means
of company owned/hired vehicles, transportation due to
guest pick-up in ITC Hotels and sources for calculation of
emission factors are as follows:

5. GHG Removals

GHG removals from plantations have been calculated
based on the approved methodology used in ITC’s
UNFCCC registered CDM project ‘2241: Reforestation
of severely degraded landmass in Khammam District of
Andhra Pradesh, India under ITC Social Forestry Project.’

Road – Emission factors for trucks are calculated based * The Frequency of quantification of GHG emissions from minor
on the Report by World Bank on Road Transport Service sources is once in three years.
190

Memberships & Affiliations - 2016

Annexure

Memberships & Affiliations – 2016
Andhra Pradesh Forest Development
Corporation of India Limited
Agricultural & Processed Foods Export
Development Authority
All India Food Processors Association
All India Management Association
Andhra Chamber of Commerce

Chambers

of

Commerce

of

Industry

Bihar Industries Association

Employee Federation of South India

Fairtrade International (FLO), Germany
Federation of Andhra Pradesh Chambers
of Commerce and Industry
Federation of Biscuits Manufacturers
Association of India

Federation of Indian Export Organisations

Bihar State Productivity Council
Bombay Management Association

Federation of Indian
Commerce and Industry

Chambers

of

Federation of Industries and Commerce of
North Eastern Region

British Safety Council
Bureau of Indian Standards
Technology

Ecotourism Society of India

Federation of Hotels & Restaurants
Association of India

Bihar Chamber of Commerce

Central Food
Institute

Confederation of Indian Industry

Export Inspection Council of India

Associated Chambers of Commerce and
Industry of Uttar Pradesh
Bangalore
Chamber
and Commerce

Cooperation Centre for Scientific Research
Relative to Tobacco

Employers’ Association of Northern India

Asian Packaging Federation
Associated
& Industry

Coimbatore Productivity Council

Research

Central Institute of Plastics Engineering
& Technology
Chemicals & Plastics Export Council
of India
Coal Consumers Association
Cochin Chamber of Commerce & Industry
Coffee Board
Coffee Exporters Association
Coimbatore Management Association

Federation of Jharkhand Chambers of
Commerce & Industry
Federation of Karnataka Chambers of
Commerce & Industry
Gujarat Chamber of Commerce & Industry
Guwahati Management Association
Hotel Association of India
Indian Association of Tour Operators
Indian Beauty and Hygiene Association
Indian Chamber of Commerce Calcutta
Indian Chamber of
Industry, Coimbatore

Commerce

and
191

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

Indian Coffee Trade Association

Pacific Asia Travel Association

India Convention Promotion Bureau

PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry

Indian Flexible Packaging & Folding
Carton Manufacturers Association

Protein Food and Nutrition Development
Association of India

Indian Institute of Packaging

Ranjangaon Industries Association

Indian Merchants’ Chamber

Retailers Association of India

Indian Paper Manufacturers Association

Seafood Exporters Association of India

Indian Printing Packaging and Allied
Machinery Manufacturers Association

Solvent Extractors Association of India

Indian Pulp & Paper Technical Association

Tamil Nadu
Association

Indian Tobacco Association
Indian Wind Power Association

Electricity

Consumers

The All India Association of Industries

Indo American Chamber of Commerce
Indo German Chamber of Commerce
Industrial Waste Management Association
International Chamber of Commerce

The Bengal Chamber of Commerce
& Industry
The Central Organisation for Oil Industry
and Trade

International Flexible Packaging Network

The Clothing Manufacturers Association
of India

International Life Science Institute

The Energy and Research Institute

International Packaging Group

The Food Safety and Standards Authority
of India

Karnataka Planters Association
Leatherhead Food International, UK
Madras Chamber of Commerce & Industry
Madras Management Association
Madras Printers
Association
Maharashtra
Council

and

Lithographers

Economic

Development

Marine Products Export Development
Authority
National Commodity
Exchange Limited

The Indian Society of Advertisers
The Utkal
& Industry

Chamber

of

Commerce

Travel Agents Association of India
United States Tour Operators Association
US Food and Drug Administration
US Green Building Council

Mahratta Chamber of Commerce, Industry
& Agriculture

&

Derivatives

National Safety Council
Oil Technologists’ Association of India
192

Soyabean Processors Association of India

Western UP Chamber of Commerce
& Industry
World Business Council for Sustainable
Development
World Travel
India Initiative

&

Tourism

Council

World Wide Fund - Global Forest and
Trade Network

Independent Assurance Statements

193

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

194

Independent Assurance Statements

195

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

196

Independent Assurance Statements

197

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS

198

Independent Assurance Statements

199

Snapshot of ITC’s Sustainability Initiatives:
Select Media Coverage

200

ITC: Transforming Lives
and Landscapes

ITC’s e-Choupal

ITC’s Afforestation Programme

ITC’s Watershed Development Programme

ITC’s Livestock Development Initiative

ITC’s Women Empowerment Initiative

ITC’s Primary Education Initiative

Empowering 4 million farmers

Providing Soil & Moisture conservation to
nearly 2,70,000 hectares of drylands

Creating over 50,000 sustainable livelihoods
for women

ITC’s Skilling & Vocational Training Initiative
Nearly 34,000 youth trained

Greening more than 2,25,000 hectares

Providing animal husbandry services for
nearly 13,00,000 milch animals

Benefitting nearly 4,70,000 children

ITC’s Health & Sanitation Programme
Nearly 16,000 low-cost sanitary units
constructed

ITC is the only enterprise in the world of comparable dimensions to be Carbon Positive, Water Positive and Solid Waste Recycling Positive.
ITC’s businesses and value chains support over 6 million sustainable livelihoods
Figures in this section are as on June 2016.

