SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015
ITC LIMITED

FOR ALL OUR TOMORROWS
GRI - G4 COMPLIANT: IN ACCORDANCE - COMPREHENSIVE

ITC’s Sustainability Report can be
downloaded from www.itcportal.com

ITC’s Sustainability app can be downloaded from
http://www.itcportal.com/app/itc-apps.aspx

Follow ITC on Twitter @ITCCorpCom

ITC Limited is an Organizational Stakeholder of GRI
and supports GRI’s mission to provide widely used
standards on sustainability reporting.

Contents
04
10

126

Chairman’s Statement
Organisational Profile

Supply Chain

24

Certifications, Honours and Awards 30

34

Stakeholder Engagement,
Risks & Opportunities and
Materiality Analysis

48

Report Profile, Scope
and Boundary

54

Governance Structure

62

Category: Economic

Management Approach

64

Economic Performance

65

74

Category: Social

Labour Practices &
Decent Work and
Human Rights

128

Occupational Health
and Safety

136

Social Investments –
Mission Sunehra Kal

144

Product Responsibility 164

174

GRI Index

193

GRI-G4 Food
Processing Sector
Supplement (FPSS)

Category: Environment

Management Approach

76

Energy

78

Air Emissions

84

Water Management

96

Recycling and Waste Management

108

Raw Materials

116

Biodiversity

122

195
196

Alignment to BRR
Principles
Annexures

Policies and Guidelines

196

Quantification Methodology:
Energy and GHG Emissions

197

Memberships and Affiliations

198

Independent Assurance
200 Statements

Sustainable
Livelihoods
n	

Triple Bottom Line
Performance

More than 1,95,000
hectares greened
Out of this, ITC’s Social Forestry
Programme cumulatively covers 69,421
hectares in 3,958 villages, impacting
over 72,000 poor households.

n	

Well-being Out of Waste
(WOW)
The ‘Well-being Out of Waste’ initiative
inculcates the habit of source
segregation and recycling. The initiative
currently extends to Hyderabad, Chennai,
Bengaluru, Coimbatore and some towns
of Telangana.

ITC: Creating 6 Million
Sustainable Livelihoods
Environment
n	

Carbon Positive:
10 Consecutive years

n	

Water Positive:
13 years in a row

n	

Solid Waste
Recycling Positive:
for the last 8 years

n	

Soil & Moisture conservation
to over 2,00,000 hectares
ITC’s Watershed Development Programme,
designed to assist farmers in identified
moisture-stressed areas, increased by an
additional 63,492 hectares in 2014-15
taking the total area covered under the
programme to over 2,12,200 hectares.

n	

n	

ITC has created multiple drivers
of growth by developing a
portfolio of world-class Indian
businesses and brands.
Over the last nineteen years:
n	

Net Revenue grew at a
compound rate of 15% annually

Over 43% of ITC’s total energy requirements
was met from carbon neutral sources such
as biomass, wind and solar.

n	

Net Profit grew at 20.9% per
annum

Greenest Luxury Hotel Chain

n	

Total Shareholder Returns
(measured in terms of increase
in market capitalisation and
dividends) grew at a compound
annual growth rate of 24.3%.

Use of Renewable Energy

All ITC’s premium luxury Hotels are
LEED® Platinum certified (certification
is in progress for the super premium ITC
Grand Bharat which opened recently).

02

Economic

Triple Bottom Line
Performance
n	

n	

Diversified multi-business
conglomerate spanning
FMCG, Hotels, Paperboards &
Packaging, Agri Business and
Information Technology
Market capitalisation:
$ 40 billion

n	

Turnover: Nearly $ 8 billion

n	

ITC Group provides direct
employment to more than
32,000 people

n	

These women were gainfully employed
either through micro-enterprises or
assisted with loans to pursue income
generating activities.
n	

n	

Primary Education Initiative:
Benefitting 4,20,000 children
During 2014-15, a new initiative called the
‘Read India Programme’ reached out to
36,000 children. In addition, another 34,000
children were covered by Supplementary
Learning Centres, taking the total number
of children benefitted to 4,20,000.

n	

Animal husbandry services
for nearly 12,00,000 milch
animals
The programme for genetic improvement
of cattle through artificial insemination
to produce high-yielding crossbred
progenies is implemented through 256
Cattle Development Centres covering
over 10,000 villages.

Social
ITC’s Social Investments
Programme is spread over
16 states covering 71 districts.

Over 45,000 sustainable
livelihoods for rural women

n	

Afforestation programme
generates nearly 90 million
person-days of employment

n	

ITC’s bio-diversity
programme now covers
3,191 hectares
The objective is to protect native
flora and fauna and providing other
eco-system services.

n	

ITC e-Choupal: Empowering
4 million farmers

ITC’s Vocational Training
programme - Training over
22,000 youth

ITC’s globally acknowledged e-Choupal
initiative is the world’s largest rural
digital infrastructure benefitting over
4 million farmers.

This program played an active role
in building and upgrading skills of
marginalised youth to better meet the
emerging needs of the job market.

Figures in this section are as on June 2015. Figures in the rest of the Report pertain to the Financial year 2014-15.

03

Chairman’s
Statement

I

have great pleasure in presenting ITC’s Sustainability Report 2015.

This is the 12th year of its publication. As in earlier years, this Report, prepared as a pro-active
disclosure of ITC’s Triple Bottom Line performance, is independently assured and based on the
international guidelines recommended by the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI). It is a matter
of great satisfaction that this Report once again conforms to the highest “In Accordance –
Comprehensive” level of reporting prescribed in the latest G4 guidelines of GRI.
I am also happy to once again reaffirm ITC’s commitment to the principles of the United Nation’s
Global Compact. It is indeed heartening that the Company’s large-scale social investments
continue to make a meaningful contribution to the country’s progress towards achieving the
UN Millennium Development Goals.

A World in Peril
One of the most enduring images that shocked the world in 2015 was of the “boat people
refugees” - thousands of men, women and children desperately fleeing poverty, persecution
and conflict in a perilous journey across the Mediterranean to seek asylum in the European
Continent. Equally of concern have been the recent events of extreme weather that continue
to worsen with every passing year - be it the scorching heat wave in India that has already
claimed more lives in any single year in the last decade or the continuing four-year drought in
California that has demonstrated the vulnerability of people in even the world’s richest nation.

04

These are vignettes of a world in peril and of a deep-rooted global malaise that threatens the
future of mankind.
For over a century, the world has witnessed remarkable progress. Man conquered space,
eliminated dreaded diseases, and shrunk the globe into a borderless virtual society. World
GDP expanded over 60-fold in the last 50 years. Yet, a grossly unequal world got created. Less
than 1% of adults in the world own 44% of global wealth, while the bottom 70% own just 3%
of the world’s wealth. It is obvious that the economic model pursued by the world for decades
failed to deliver growth with equity. The consequences are dangerous. Apart from widespread global poverty, an entire generation of 600 million youth today stare at a jobless future.
The resultant frustration, disillusionment and despair not only fuel social unrest but make
them vulnerable to the lure of crime and even terrorism. Unstable societies cannot foster
sustainable economic growth. It negates the tremendous advancements made in science and
technology miring the world in a state of constant conflict and uncertainty.
The race for material wealth creation over the last century also paid scant attention to
the imperative need for environmental replenishment. Today, the world consumes natural
resources at a rate that is one and a half times the earth’s capacity to regenerate. At this
pace, we will bequeath future generations a barren planet in less than 30 years from now.
The spectre of climate change is no longer an issue of the future. It is here and now, posing
the greatest threat to poor farming communities who are the most vulnerable to the vagaries
of nature.
India’s socio-economic challenges mirror the global conundrum. If at
all, our problems are even more acute. Nearly 300 million people
need critical support to move out of endemic poverty. Every
year 12 million young people join the workforce. With gainful
opportunities, they will be a source of exponential growth.
Without adequate opportunities, they will be a source of
explosive disaster. India is set to cross China in 2025 as
the world’s most populous nation. How do we ensure food
security, water security, energy security and livelihood
security for these teeming millions? How will the conflict for
food, fuel, feed, forests and fibre be resolved from the
scarce land resources? We have 17% of the world’s
population, but only 2.4% of arable land, 4% of
water and 1% of forest resources. It is obvious
that we need a new model of economic growth
that will simultaneously fuel economic growth,
create sustainable livelihoods and replenish and
preserve the environment. And that is indeed a
tall order.

05

Sustainable
Livelihoods

ITC’s businesses
and valuechains generate
sustainable
livelihoods for
around 6 million
people, many of
whom represent
the weakest in
society

The Role of Business
No single section of society can enable such transformational change of epic proportions.
A confluence of efforts is therefore required from all sections of society - be it Government,
Business or other sections of Civil Society.
It is my strong belief that Business can play an immensely constructive and meaningful role.
Businesses possess the innovative capability, creative capacity and entrepreneurial vitality to
engender transformational change by harnessing these strengths to co-create much larger
societal value. They are also present in the front-line of economic activity with numerous
touch points in society, enabling a synergy of financial and managerial resources to deliver
impactful solutions.
The seed of unleashing this transformative capacity for the larger good of society lies in
defining a super-ordinate purpose of business. It is this fundamental belief that has helped
shape ITC’s Vision & Strategy in building a sustainable enterprise of tomorrow.

ITC’s Vision & Strategy
Close to two decades ago, when I assumed office as Chairman, the Company was confronted
with formidable challenges. The early diversification efforts had either failed or were
languishing, the businesses were not competitive enough in an emerging liberalised economic
environment, and the Company’s reputation was sullied by a public smear campaign triggered
by a hostile takeover attempt. It was critically important to create a new future for the
organisation by redefining a vision that could invigorate and inject new life to every sinew of
the enterprise.
Inspired by the opportunity to serve larger national priorities, we articulated a super-ordinate
Vision to make ITC a National Champion by not only repositioning the organisation for extreme
competitiveness but by also making societal value creation the bedrock of our business
strategy. We committed ourselves to abiding Values, with Trusteeship at its core, ensuring
that we put Country before Corporation and the Institution before the Individual. The focus
was on spurring innovative strategies that would enable us to make a growing contribution to
building economic, environmental and social capital for the nation. It was our aspiration that
this Triple Bottom Line approach would manifest not only in sustained wealth creation for all
our stakeholders, but also in the simultaneous generation of sustainable livelihoods as well as
augmentation of precious natural resources.
A multi-pronged strategy was put into play to enable a new dimension of growth that would
be sustainable and inclusive. Leveraging enterprise strengths, and by matching internal
competencies with the opportunities of an emerging economy, multiple drivers of growth
were launched through a chosen portfolio of vibrant businesses. Relentless efforts were made
to create world-class Indian brands that would help in capturing and retaining more value for
the Indian economy. The vitality of such brands also serve as market anchors to enhance the
competitiveness of the entire value chain, including that of farmers and rural communities.
To ensure a positive environmental footprint, ITC adopted a low-carbon growth strategy which
focusses on enhanced use of renewable energy sources as well as reduction in specific energy
consumption. At the same time, the Company also invested in enlarging its positive footprint
through increased carbon sequestration by expanding forestry projects in wastelands.
Endeavours to reduce specific water consumption and augment rainwater harvesting activities
both on site and off site at watershed catchment areas contributed to the imperative need to
ensure water security. Focussed initiatives to minimise waste generation, maximise reuse &
recycling and use external post-consumer waste as raw material in its units contributed to
maximising and optimising resource efficiency.

06

Chairman’s
Statement
To accomplish the goal of securing sustainable livelihoods, the Company’s Social Investments
Programme has identified three important stakeholder groups: (a) rural communities in the
Company’s operational areas which face enormous challenges in ensuring the sustainability
of their farming systems; (b) communities residing in close proximity to our production units
which require sustainable solutions to help generate additional income streams; and (c) Central
and State governments, that encourage Public-Private-People Partnerships to demonstrate
scalable and replicable models of development. Interventions have been appropriately
designed to respond to the unique multi-dimensional development challenges of such
communities in order to accomplish the overall goal of creating sustainable livelihoods. The
footprint of ITC’s CSR projects promoted under the Social Investments Programme is spread
over 14 states covering 71 districts.
To guide ITC’s proactive action for superior Triple Bottom Line Performance, a comprehensive
set of Sustainability Policies has been adopted. A comprehensive CSR policy has also
been crafted to define the framework for the Company’s Social Investments Programme.
The Board Committee on CSR and Sustainability reviews, monitors and provides strategic
direction to the Company’s CSR and sustainability practices. The Committee formulates,
reviews and monitors the CSR Policy and recommends to the Board the annual CSR Plan of
the Company in terms of the Companies Act, 2013. An internal Sustainability Compliance
Review Committee has also been constituted to monitor and evaluate compliance with the
Sustainability Policies of the Company.
Today, I draw immense satisfaction that the vision and strategy adopted to pursue sustainable
and inclusive growth have enabled the Company to be a global exemplar in sustainability.
ITC’s businesses and value-chains generate sustainable livelihoods for around 6 million
people, many of whom represent the weakest in society. Relentless pursuit of environmental
excellence has also led ITC to be the only Company in the world of comparable dimensions
to be carbon positive for 10 years now, water positive for 13 years in a row and solid waste
recycling positive for the last 8 years.

Creating Sustainable Livelihoods
The theme for this year’s Sustainability Report – Creating Sustainable Livelihoods – highlights
the Company’s progress in contributing to this very important priority for developing countries
like India. Over 65% of India’s population is below 35 years of age, and therefore significantly
large numbers will progressively enter the work-stream every year. Creation of sustainable
livelihood opportunities is thus a crying priority. The Hon’ble Prime Minister has highlighted,
on more than one occasion, the critical need to generate jobs across all sectors of the economy.
The flagship schemes announced, such as Make in India, Skill India and Digital India, are all
aligned to help create growing livelihood opportunities in the near future.
Over the years, ITC has made a far-reaching contribution to the national cause of livelihood
creation, particularly in rural India. The Company’s integrated rural development programme
has helped create a vibrant rural eco-system empowering farmers, enriching the environment
and raising rural incomes. These innovative interventions have reached meaningful scale given
the core focus on empowerment and co-creation, development of institutional frameworks
and capacity building at the grass-roots.
ITC’s celebrated e-Choupal initiative, that empowers farmers by leveraging the power of the
Internet as well as through a host of services related to know how, best practices, relevant
weather information, transparent discovery of prices and many more, has till date empowered
4 million farmers in 40,000 villages.
The Company’s Afforestation programme enables poor tribals and small farmers to transform
private wastelands into green plantations. It has so far greened nearly 2,00,000 hectares and

Relentless pursuit
of environmental
excellence has
also led ITC to be
the only Company
in the world
of comparable
dimensions to be
carbon positive for
10 years now, water
positive for 13 years
in a row and solid
waste recycling
positive for the last
8 years
07

Sustainable
Livelihoods
generated close to 90 million person days of employment. By 2017-18, ITC plans to augment
this programme with an additional 92,000 hectares.
ITC’s Integrated Watershed Development programme provides soil and moisture conservation
to over 2,00,000 hectares and has generated over 4.7 million person days of employment
benefitting more than 1,60,000 families. By 2017-18, the watershed development programme
is projected to cover an additional 1,82,000 hectares.
The Company’s Livestock Development programme has created off-farm livelihood options for
over 4,60,000 cattle owners and has provided animal husbandry services to over 11,00,000
milch animals. This programme will extend services to an additional 6,30,000 milch animals
by 2017-18.
The Women’s Empowerment programme has created sustainable livelihood opportunities
for over 43,000 women so far, with plans to include 25,000 more women in the programme
by 2017-18.
The Primary Education programme aims at increasing enrolments, minimising drop-outs, and
providing infrastructural support to government schools. It has benefitted nearly 4,00,000
rural children, helping them to build a better future. By 2017-18, this programme is envisaged
to reach out to an additional 1,45,000 children.
ITC’s Vocational Training programme equips youth with necessary skills and makes them
more employable in the formal sectors of the economy. The programme has benefitted
over 19,000 youths so far. In the next 3 years, another 33,000 youths will be covered
under this programme.
Improving the quality of life of rural households, ITC’s Health & Sanitation initiative in alignment
with the Government’s ‘Swacch Bharat’ campaign, has constructed over 8,000 family toilets.
The Company plans to construct 8,250 more toilets by the close of FY 2018.
By adopting a 360 degree approach to enriching rural eco-systems, ITC has put in place
long term drivers that will contribute meaningfully to the national priority of employment
generation and sustainable growth.

Environmental Stewardship
Today, more
than 43% of
the Company’s
total energy
consumption is
from renewable
sources. Several
ITC Hotels and
manufacturing
facilities are
powered by
renewable energy.
It is our aspiration
to increase the
share of renewable
energy to 50% by
2020

08

Climate change is undoubtedly one of the most daunting challenges confronting society
today. While ITC’s large scale initiatives in afforestation, sustainable agricultural practices
and watershed development have helped in making rural communities in our catchment
areas more secure, the Company has also pursued an extensive low carbon strategy in its
operations. This is manifest in our efforts to continuously enhance energy efficiency and
conservation as well as invest in cleaner and renewable energy sources. Today, more than 43%
of the Company’s total energy consumption is from renewable sources. Several ITC Hotels and
manufacturing facilities are powered by renewable energy. It is our aspiration to increase the
share of renewable energy to 50% by 2020. Pioneering the movement for ’green buildings’,
several of the Company’s properties are now LEED® certified. All premium luxury hotels
of ITC have earned the LEED® (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) Platinum
certification making ITC Hotels the “greenest luxury hotel chain” in the world. The ITC Grand
Chola is the world’s largest LEED® Platinum certified green hotel and enjoys a 5 Star GRIHA
rating, the highest national rating for green buildings. The ITC Green Centre in Gurgaon is the
highest rated green building in the world. The ITC Green Centre in Manesar has earned the
LEED® Platinum certification, as well as the BEE 5 Star rating from the Government of India.
ITC continuously strives to improve processes and systems to minimise its environmental
impact as far as possible, create a work environment that is safe, healthy, productive and fair

Chairman’s
Statement
for its employees and proactively engages with its suppliers and partners to maximise value
for all stakeholders.
Recognising the need for collective action to shape a shared future that is more sustainable
and inclusive, ITC has partnered the Confederation of Indian Industry to set up a Centre of
Excellence for Sustainable Development to help build the enterprises of tomorrow. The Centre
champions the adoption of sustainability practices by raising awareness, building capacity,
enabling thought leadership and recognising excellence.

Being Future Ready with Responsible
Competitiveness
While ITC has achieved significant milestones in its sustainability journey, the road ahead
will continue to be challenging. For companies like ours, deeply rooted in India’s soil, we
recognise the need to play a much larger role in creating growing societal value for the
country given the colossal socio-economic challenges. Therefore, it is not only crucial to
build extreme competitiveness in an increasingly global Indian market, but to also ensure
that growth strategies foster sustainable growth. Unfortunately, we compete in a market
where many have not adopted a broader canvas of contributing to larger societal goals, but
are largely focussed on the narrow pursuit of financial competitiveness alone. Therefore,
our commitment to building Responsible Competitiveness entails a far larger mobilisation of
resources, organisational energy and creativity. Regrettably, markets, as they are structured
today, do not prize companies that create larger societal value but continue to predominantly
reward financial value creation alone. A paradigm change will take place only when consumers,
investors, and civil society make an enlightened choice in favour of products and services of
sustainable companies. This will unleash strong market drivers to support corporates that
innovate to deliver larger sustainable and inclusive value. Preferential government policy and
incentives in favour of such companies will lend even further support to companies that subserve larger national priorities.

For companies
like ours, deeply
rooted in India’s
soil, we recognise
the need to play a
much larger role in
creating growing
societal value
for the country
given the colossal
socio-economic
challenges

ITC’s aspiration to be a National Champion is manifest in its Vision and Values as well as in the
Vitality of its human capital, dedicated to building an exemplary enterprise for the country.
We recognise that the Company’s capacity to create societal value will crucially depend on
the continued robust growth of its businesses. Towards this, significant investments have
been made to create superior intellectual capital through a world-class ITC Life Sciences and
Technology Centre; in brick and mortar industrial infrastructure; in iconic hotels; in worldclass Indian brands; in talent management and in an efficient marketing and distribution
network that will together lend renewed strength to the Company in the years to come.
This Sustainability Report is once again a dedication of our pledge to contribute to a secure,
sustainable and inclusive future. I would like to thank all our stakeholders for their support
and encouragement in making this a meaningful journey towards a promising tomorrow.

Y C Deveshwar
Chairman, ITC Limited
June, 2015

09

Organisational
Profile

ITC’s Businesses
FMCG

Hotels

Paperboards,
Paper & Packaging

Agri
Business

Information
Technology

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Creating Enduring Value
ITC Limited is one of India’s most valuable and admired
corporations. Inspired by an abiding vision to sub-serve
larger national priorities, ITC has pursued innovative
strategies to synergise the creation of long-term shareholder
value with the continuous enhancement of societal and
environmental capital.

Creating World-Class Brands that
Capture Value for India
Creating Multiple Drivers
of Growth
With a turnover of nearly $ 8 billion and a market
capitalisation of $ 42 billion, ITC’s aspiration to create
enduring value for the Nation and its stakeholders
is manifest in its robust and diversified portfolio
of traditional and greenfield businesses. The
competitiveness of ITC’s diverse businesses rest on the
strong foundations of institutional strengths derived
from its deep consumer insights, cutting-edge Research
& Development, differentiated product development
capacity, brand-building capability, world-class
manufacturing infrastructure, extensive rural linkages,
efficient trade marketing and distribution network and
dedicated human resources. ITC’s ability to leverage
internal synergies residing across its diverse businesses
lends a unique source of competitive advantage to
its products and services. Today ITC is the country’s
leading FMCG marketer, the clear market leader in the
Indian Paperboard and Packaging industry, a globally
acknowledged pioneer in farmer empowerment through
its wide-reaching Agri Business, the second largest Hotel
Chain in India and a trailblazer in ‘green hoteliering’. ITC
Infotech, a wholly-owned subsidiary, is one of India’s
fast-growing IT companies in the mid-tier segment. This
portfolio of rapidly growing businesses considerably
enhances ITC’s capacity to generate growing value for
the country.

12

ITC believes that it is of paramount importance to build
and nurture world-class Indian brands which help create,
capture and retain larger value for the Indian economy,
in addition to generating sustainable livelihoods. A
successful brand is a badge of honour for the country it
belongs to, and a sustained source of wealth creation.
Leveraging the Company’s core competencies,
institutional strengths and internal synergies, the new
FMCG businesses comprising Branded Packaged Foods,
Personal Care Products, Lifestyle Retailing, Education &
Stationery Products and Matches and Agarbattis have
gained significant market standing over the years. This
phenomenal growth has been rated by a Nielsen Report
to be the fastest among the consumer goods companies
operating in India. Within a relatively short span of time,
ITC has established vital brands, many of which are today
market leaders in their segments, or have garnered a
significant share of consumer franchise. ITC’s bouquet
of brands includes ‘Aashirvaad’, ‘Sunfeast Dark Fantasy’,
‘Sunfeast Dream Cream’, ‘Sunfeast Delishus’, ‘Sunfeast
Mom’s Magic’, ‘Sunfeast Yumfills’, ‘Sunfeast Bounce’,
‘Bingo!’, ‘Yumitos’, ‘YiPPee!’, ‘Candyman’, ‘mint-o’,
‘B Natural’, ‘GumOn’ and ‘Kitchens of India’ in the
Branded Packaged Foods space; ‘Classmate’ and
‘Paperkraft’ in Education & Stationery products market;
‘Essenza Di Wills’, ‘Fiama Di Wills’, ‘Engage’, ‘Vivel’ and
‘Superia’ in the Personal Care products segment; ‘Wills
Lifestyle’ and ‘John Players’ in the Lifestyle Retailing
Business; ‘Mangaldeep’ in Agarbattis and ‘Aim’ in
Matches, amongst others.

Organisational
Profile

Building Natural and
Social Capital
ITC’s Vision of sustainable and inclusive growth
has led to the adoption of a Triple Bottom Line
approach that simultaneously builds economic, social
and environmental capital. Its Social Investment
Programmes including Social Forestry, Soil & Moisture
Conservation, Sustainable Agriculture, Livestock
Development, Biodiversity, Women Empowerment,
Education, Skilling & Vocational Training and Health &
Sanitation have had a transformational impact on rural
India. These Programmes strive to empower stakeholder
communities to conserve, manage and augment their
natural resources, create sustainable on and off-farm
livelihood sources and improve social infrastructure in
rural areas. Through its businesses and associated value
chains, ITC has supported the generation of around 6
million livelihoods, touching the lives of many living at
the margins in rural India.
In line with its commitment to environmental goals,
ITC has constantly strived to reduce the impact of its
businesses, processes, products, and services and
create a positive footprint. ITC has adopted a low-carbon
growth strategy through reduction in specific energy
consumption and enhancing use of renewable energy
sources. At the same time it seeks to enlarge its positive
footprint through increased carbon sequestration by
expanding forestry projects in wastelands. 43.1% of the
total energy requirement of the Company is today met
from renewable sources, a testimony to its commitment
to a low carbon growth path. ITC also endeavours
to reduce specific water consumption and augment
rainwater harvesting activities both on site and off site at
watershed catchment areas, as well as minimise waste
generation, maximise reuse & recycling and use external
post-consumer waste as raw material in its units.

Achievements
ITC has received national and global recognition for
its multi-faceted achievements. It has been ranked as
‘India’s Most Admired Company’ in a survey conducted
by Fortune India magazine and Hay Group. ITC has also
been rated as the world’s 8th largest ‘sustainable value
creator’ among consumer goods companies globally,
according to a report by the Boston Consulting Group
(BCG). As a testimony to its exemplary Triple Bottom
Line performance, ITC has also been presented the
World Business and Development Award at the historic
Rio+20 UN Summit for its Social and Farm Forestry
initiative. ITC Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar has been
ranked the 7th Best Performing CEO in the world by
the Harvard Business Review in its January-February
edition 2013. Mr Deveshwar has also been conferred the
Padma Bhushan, one of the country’s highest civilian
honours, for his leadership in transforming ITC into
an organisation with a deep commitment to national
priorities of sustainable and inclusive growth.

13

Sustainable
Livelihoods

ITC’s Businesses
Fast Moving Consumer Goods
ITC straddles a range of businesses within the
FMCG segment, including Branded Packaged
Foods, Personal Care Products, Cigarettes,
Lifestyle Retailing, Education and Stationery
Products, and Safety Matches and Incense
Sticks (Agarbattis). Keeping pace with the
rapid growth of the FMCG industry in India,
ITC has significantly scaled up its presence
in this segment.

14

Organisational
Profile

Branded Packaged Foods
ITC’s Branded Packaged Foods business is
one of the fastest growing foods businesses
in India. A spread of delectable offerings
in Staples, Snacks & Meals, Confections
and Beverages is available under 8 popular
brands - ‘Aashirvaad’, ‘Sunfeast’, ‘Bingo!’,
‘YiPPee!’, ‘Kitchens of India’, ‘mint-o’,
‘B Natural’, ‘Candyman’ and ‘GumOn’. In line
with the Company’s strategic objective of
being the leader in the premium segment,
ITC Foods offers an array of top-end products
like Aashirvaad Select, Aashirvaad Atta with
Multigrains and Aashirvaad Atta with Methi;
Sunfeast Dark Fantasy Choco Fills and

Sunfeast Dark Fantasy Choco Meltz; Sunfeast
Delishus Nuts & Raisins and Sunfeast
Delishus Nut Biscotti biscuits. Adding to this
bouquet, the business launched the health
biscuit, Sunfeast Farmlite in two variants
(Almonds and Raisins), and a new range
of cookies, Sunfeast Mom’s Magic (Rich
Butter and Cashew & Almonds). To further
its presence in the premium segment, it also
entered the cakes category with the launch
of the delicious Yumfills Whoopie Pie. The
Business forayed into the Juices segment
during the year with its new range under the
B Natural brand and the gums segment with
the GumOn brand.

15

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Keeping pace with
the rapid growth of
the FMCG industry
in India, ITC has
significantly scaled
up its presence in
this segment

16

Personal Care Products
Specially crafted for Indian preferences,
ITC’s personal care products portfolio offers
a range of internationally benchmarked
grooming and personal wash products.
Anchored on extensive consumer and market
research based product development, ITC’s
personal care brands ‘Essenza Di Wills’,
‘Fiama Di Wills’, ‘Engage’, ‘Vivel’, ‘Cell Renew’
and ‘Superia’ offer products with relevant,
differentiated benefits to the discerning
consumer. Essenza Di Wills has been
created to encapsulate the essence of fine
living through an exclusive, internationally
developed range of fine fragrances and
grooming products. Fiama Di Wills offers a
range of shower gels, gel bars and skin care

products exquisitely created to give gentle
and effective care for timeless youthfulness.
Engage’s proposition of ‘playful chemistry’
is represented in its increasingly popular
portfolio of colognes and deodorants. Vivel
offers a wide range of bath care products
designed to cater to the specific skincare
needs of the Indian consumer. It is enriched
with Vitamin E and rich nourishing ingredients
to fulfil its promise of soft glowing skin.
Shower to Shower medicated powder protects
from prickly heat and controls sweat. Savlon
provides effective anti-bacterial protection
through a range of antiseptic liquid, soaps
and handwash. Savlon products are known
for their gentleness whilst offering effective
germ protection.

Organisational
Profile

Cigarettes
ITC also strengthened its product portfolio across segments to reinforce its leadership position
in the cigarette industry.

Lifestyle Retailing
ITC’s Lifestyle Retailing business continues
to grow its market standing by investing in
brand building, enhancing product vitality
and supply chain capabilities; expanding
its retail footprint across the country.
Synonymous with Fashion and Elegance,
the Wills Lifestyle range of apparels offers a
premium lifestyle wardrobe for Indian men
and women at over 100 exclusive specialty
stores. With its high fashion imagery,
rich product mix and delightful shopping
experience, the brand offers a tempting
choice of ‘Wills Classic’ formal wear, ‘Wills
Sport’ relaxed wear, ‘Wills Clublife’ evening
wear and ‘Wills Signature’ designer wear.
‘John Players’ embodies the essence of the
Indian youth that is free-spirited, playful
and fashionable. The brand presents smart
formals, trendy casuals and edgy denims
incorporating an exciting mix of colours,
patterns, styling and fits.

17

Sustainable
Livelihoods

In line with
the Company’s
strategic objective
of being the leader
in the premium
segment, ITC Foods
offers an array of
top-end products

18

Education and Stationery
Products

Safety Matches and Incense
Sticks (Agarbattis)

ITC’s Education & Stationery Products
Business offers consumers a wide range of
differentiated products under the brands
‘Classmate’ and ‘Paperkraft’. A clear
market leader in the student notebooks
segment, Classmate’s portfolio also includes
writing instruments (pens & pencils) and
scholastic products (mathematical drawing
instruments, scales, erasers & sharpeners).
Colour Crew, a new sub brand of Classmate
offers an exciting range of superior quality
student art materials which includes nontoxic oil pastels, wax crayons and sketch pens.
The Business recently launched Saathi, a
value brand of notebooks, targeted at smaller
markets. The ‘Paperkraft’ brand is the leading
provider of premium executive & office paper
stationery including notebook ranges of
Green Impression and Signature Series as
well as an assortment of premium pens.
Offering the greenest range of stationery
products, supported by a green wood
fibre value chain that creates large-scale
livelihoods in rural India, ‘Classmate’ and
‘Paperkraft’ notebooks are an embodiment of
the environmental capital built by ITC in its
paper business.

ITC’s
‘Mangaldeep’
agarbattis
are
manufactured by small scale and cottage
units, providing livelihood opportunities for
more than 14,000 people. Mangaldeep ASHA
(Assistance in Social Habilitation through
Agarbattis) is an ITC initiative to improve
the quality of raw agarbatti production and
provide better livelihood for women rollers.
Sourced from the small-scale sector, the
Safety Matches business leverages the
core strength of ITC in marketing and
distribution, brand building and supply chain
management to offer Indian consumers
high quality safety matches. ITC’s range
of Safety Matches includes popular brands
like ‘AIM’ & ‘Homelites’.

Organisational
Profile

Hotels
With more than 100 hotels in over 70
destinations in the country, ITC Hotels has
redefined the fine art of hospitality. ITC’s hotel
group operates under 4 brands: ‘ITC Hotel’ at
the luxury end, ‘WelcomHotel’ in the 5 star
segment, ‘Fortune’ in the mid-market to upscale
segment and ‘WelcomHeritage’ in the heritage
leisure segment. Embodying ITC Hotels’ credo
of ‘Responsible Luxury’, all ITC luxury hotels
are an archetype of the culture and ethos of
the region they are located in, offering unique
indigenous
experiences,
internationally
acclaimed cuisines and spa, with globally
benchmarked standards in accommodation,
environment and guest safety.
With a LEED® Platinum rating for all its
luxury hotels (certification is in progress for
the super premium ITC Grand Bharat which
opened recently), ITC Hotels is the ‘Greenest
Luxury Hotel Chain in the World’.

ITC’s hotel group
operates under 4
brands: ‘ITC Hotel’
at the luxury end,
‘WelcomHotel’
in the 5 star
segment, ‘Fortune’
in the midmarket to upscale
segment and
‘WelcomHeritage’
in the heritage
leisure segment
19

Sustainable
Livelihoods

ITC’s pulpwood
is largely sourced
from renewable
plantations under
its Social and
Farm Forestry
programmes,
which provide
sustainable
livelihood
opportunities
to tribals and
marginal farmers

Paperboards, Paper
& Packaging
Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Business
ITC’s Paperboards & Specialty Papers Business
is No. 1 in Product Range, Market Reach,
Environmental Performance and is the
market leader in Value-Added Paperboards in
India. Providing internationally competitive
quality and cost, the business caters to
a wide spectrum of packaging, graphic,
communication, writing, printing and
specialty paper requirements.
The business established the country’s first
Elemental Chlorine Free fiber line with Ozone
bleaching technology and is fully compliant
with world-class environmental standards.
It is also the first paper business in the
country to be invited to be a member of the
Global Forest & Trade Network (GFTN) of the
Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF). Committed
to developing a sustainable raw material
base, ITC’s pulpwood is largely sourced from
renewable plantations under its Social and
Farm Forestry programmes, which provide
sustainable livelihood opportunities to tribals
and marginal farmers.

20

Packaging and Printing Business
The Packaging and Printing Business
provides
contemporary
and
superior
packaging solutions through its state-ofthe-art technology and processes. With
multi-locational manufacturing facilities in
Chennai, Munger and Haridwar and a robust
technology platform, the business offers a
diversified & value added product range in
packaging for cartons, flexibles & tobacco
and caters to a wide range of customers in
domestic and export markets.

Organisational
Profile

The Business supplies value-added packaging
to ITC’s various FMCG businesses. Its plant in
Chennai is India’s greenest packaging facility.
Backed by expertise in design, innovative
product development and cutting edge
technology, the business has won several
World Star awards for packaging excellence.
The Business has also received appreciation
and recognition from its customers for
partnering and enhancing value through
creative packaging solutions.

Backed by
expertise in design,
innovative product
development
and cutting edge
technology, ITC’s
Packaging Business
has won several
World Star awards
for packaging
excellence

21

Sustainable
Livelihoods
crops and sources the finest of Grains, Oil
Seeds, Pulses and a range of high-value agri
products such as Fruits, Coffee and Shrimps
across multiple geographies in India.

The revolutionary
ITC e-Choupal
initiative of the
business delivers
large-scale
societal value
by co-creating
markets with rural
communities

ITC’s Agri Business provides a competitive
edge to the Company’s Foods Business
by sourcing high-quality agricultural raw
material directly from farmers and preserving
the identity of those commodities along the
supply chain, to enable manufacturing of
the food products with consumer-preferred
value traits.

Agri Business
ITC’s Agri Business is one of India’s largest
agri business players. It is also one of India’s
leading exporters of agricultural commodities.
The leadership position of the business
is anchored in the strong and enduring
partnerships it has built with farmers across
the country. The Business works with farmers
to improve the productivity and quality of

22

The revolutionary ITC e-Choupal initiative
of the business delivers large-scale societal
value by co-creating markets with rural
communities. A unique click-and-mortar
channel, it facilitates the two-way flow of
goods and services in and out of villages,
transforming them into vibrant economic
institutions. The initiative serves more than 4
million farmers in over 40,000 villages through
a network of 6,500 Internet Kiosks spread
across 11 states, making ITC e-Choupal the
largest digital infrastructure in rural India.

Organisational
Profile

Information Technology
ITC Infotech is a specialised global scale full service provider of Domain, Data and
Digital technology solutions, backed by a
strong business and technology consulting
focus. The company caters to enterprises
in Supply Chain based industries (CPG,
Retail, Manufacturing, Hi-Tech) and Services
(Banking, Financial Services and Insurance,
Airline, Hospitality) through a combination
of traditional and newer business models, as
a long term sustainable partner. With client
engagement spread across 35 countries, ITC
Infotech is engaged with over 60+ Fortune
listed companies. The company has set up
office in 18 countries and established 10
global development centres, powered by a
6500+ strong workforce. Leading companies
have placed their trust in ITC Infotech; the
company’s Top 10 clients have been with
ITC Infotech for over 10 years, a testament
to ITC Infotech’s commitment to delivering
enhanced business value. ITC Infotech won
the 2014 European Outsourcing Award in
the category “Delivering Business Value” in
European Outsourcing and is featured in the

Global Outsourcing 100 “Leader’s Category” by
the International Association of Outsourcing
Professionals (IAOP) for 9 consecutive years.

The company’s
Top 10 clients have
been with ITC
Infotech for over 10
years, a testament
to ITC Infotech’s
commitment
to delivering
enhanced business
value

23

Supply Chain

Management
Approach
ITC’s vision to subserve larger national
priorities is realised by the strategic approach
of embedding sustainability in its core
business models. Innovative strategies have
therefore been designed and implemented to
create sustainable value chains linked to its
businesses. Dependent as the organisation
is, on agricultural resources, these value
chains encompass small and marginal
farmers, who constitute some of the most
disadvantaged sections of Indian society.
The vitality of ITC’s winning brands drive the
competitiveness of these value chains. At the
same time, these linkages provide unique
sources of competitive advantage to the
Company’s businesses. ITC recognises that
with an expanding and diversified portfolio of
businesses, the actualisation of its vision of
sustainable development has to necessarily
take into account the environmental and

To formalise the sustainable procurement
process, ITC has put in place Board approved
Policies which address the issues of labour
practices, human rights, bribery, corruption,
occupational health, safety and environment
in the supply chain. These policies, meant
for Third Party Manufacturers (TPM), service
providers including transporters, suppliers
of agricultural & non-agricultural materials
and capital goods, franchisees, dealers
and distributors collectively referred to as
supply chain partners, define the structure
around which efforts are directed for
continually improving the sustainability
performance along the supply chain. These
policies are actualised through a ‘Code of
Conduct for Vendors and Service providers’
that details out specific requirements
related to the aspects addressed in the
policies. Through acceptance of this code
by the supply chain partners, ITC seeks their
commitment to comply with all applicable
laws, respect human rights and contribute to
environmental conservation.

social impact within the supply chain. It is
therefore important to extend ITC’s Triple
Bottom Line approach along the supply chain.
This will ensure long-term competitiveness
through a balance between creation of long
term social & environmental value and the
economic viability of the businesses.

Each ITC Business has developed road
maps for phase-wise implementation of
the sustainability policies and inclusion of
their supply chain within their sustainability
management system in a progressive
manner. Progress of implementation of these
road maps is reviewed by the Sustainability
Compliance Review Committee.

25

Sustainable
Livelihoods
A simplified representation of the material flow in ITC’s businesses is given below:
ITC Businesses

Leaf business

Cigarettes

Farmers
(Agri-raw
materials)

Packaging and
Printing
Paperboards
and specialty
papers
Transporters

Transporters

Personal care
products

Foods
Customers/
Consumers

Other Suppliers
(Other raw
materials, service
providers etc.)

Agri Business

Education and
Stationery
Products

Matches and
Agarbattis
*The above diagram includes material flow only and does not include Lifestyle Retailing Business, Hotels
Business and ITC Infotech
: Indicates material flow within ITC

As evident from the above representation of
the generic material flow for ITC businesses,
the supply chains of most of ITC’s businesses
are vertically integrated. Farmers are the key
suppliers for the majority of our businesses
which are dependent on agri-commodities,
and therefore constitute an integral part of
ITC’s supply chain. Accordingly the Company
has focussed on enhancing the sustainability
of its agri-supply chain, details of which are
mentioned in the section that follows.

26

Sustainability in
the Agri Supply
Chain
Agri Commodities
ITC’s Agri Business operations span the
entire spectrum of activities starting from
agri-services/crop development to risk
management, including sourcing, processing,

Supply
Chain
supply chain, multi-modal logistics, stock
management and customer service. The
solutions offered are a combination of all or
some of these interventions. The solutions
also offer the customers the flexibility
in terms of quantity, timing, as well as
packaging solutions for delivery of the
agri-commodities. These solutions not only
help customers in enhancing their cost and
quality benefits, but also create and capture
value for other partners, especially farmers.
ITC’s Agri Business Division has been
continuously investing in strengthening
capability through multiple sourcing models,
customised and identity preserved supply
chain infrastructure and network, processing
and warehousing tie-ups, technology
enabled systems and processes and people
capabilities. The Division also works closely
with farmer groups to develop identified
geographies for certified and organic
crops. These investments coupled with
deep understanding of agriculture, and the
reach of the e-Choupal network, provide the
opportunity to offer a wide range of reliable
and consistent solutions that are efficient
and effective along the entire supply chain.
ITC’s e-Choupal network ensures traceability,
identity preservation of the produce
along the entire value chain as well as
product integrity by leveraging Information
Technology and digital infrastructure
that enhances the competitiveness of the
agri value chain. This has been achieved
by empowering farmers through price

discovery, knowledge, information as well
as agricultural best practices. A hub and
spoke model has been built along with the
necessary physical infrastructure that has
enabled multi-level aggregation.
Based on the above approach, the Division
sourced over 21 lakh tonnes of agricommodities covering wheat, soya, coffee,
potato, fruits, barley, maize, rice, and shrimps
from over 20 states to service a range
of customers in India and across several
countries, including leading brand owners
and bulk processors.

Leaf Tobacco
At ITC’s Leaf Tobacco Division, the
sustainability framework encapsulates and
guides its efforts to create value for the
farming community at large and the farm
value chain in particular. Working closely
with the farming fraternity, ITC has constantly
transferred technology from the lab to
the land with appropriate crop solutions,
apart from pioneering the introduction of
High Yielding Varieties. “Model villages” are
adopted to drive sustainable community
development by empowering Indian
farmers through deployment of Good
Agricultural Practices (GAPs) to meet
customer requirements. The sustainable
crop production system enhances crop
competitiveness and surplus income
generation to the farming community. The
sustainable income generation in turn will
minimise vulnerability and drive overall
village development.

ITC’s Agri Business
Division has been
continuously
investing in
strengthening
capability through
multiple sourcing
models, customised
and identity
preserved supply
chain infrastructure
and network,
processing and
warehousing tieups, technology
enabled systems
and processes and
people capabilities

27

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Since ITC is
vertically integrated
it provides unique
opportunities
for establishing
synergy and
thereby minimising
environmental
impacts through
optimum utilisation
of raw materials,
reuse/ recycling
of wastes and
optimum logistics

28

Enabled by a team of agronomists,
agriculture
experts,
engineers
and
development managers, the sustainability
initiative has helped in substantially
improving the quality table of the Indian
tobacco basket. The key strategy of ITC’s
farmer empowerment programme is
integrated resource deployment. Multiple
interventions are grounded in the model
villages (i) Crop development for ensuring
higher productivity, product quality &
integrity (ii) Farm sustainability for ensuring
environment sustainability (iii) Research
& Development for developing next best
practices and (iv) Community development
for building rural infrastructure. The
integration aims at achieving higher farmer
income, improved crop saleability, optimum
resource utilisation and complete custody of
supplies within the auction system thereby
moving from Sustainable Crop Production to
Sustainable Livelihoods.

From an environment protection point of view,
initiatives pertaining to soil conservation,
popularising the use of organic amendments
and techniques on soil fertility management
towards reducing chemical fertilizer use
are propagated. Towards sustainable fuel
management, ITC has adopted a three
pronged approach in tobacco farm value
chain – introduction of fuel efficient
technologies, alternate fuel usage and selfsustenance through energy plantations. In
2014-15 around 10,000 hectares of energy
plantations have been undertaken around
the tobacco growing regions.

Initiatives pertaining to enhancement of
farmer profitability which are essential for
the pursuit of a sustainable living for the
farm communities are implemented across
tobacco growing regions. These include
climate resilient seedling production,
integrated pest management practices
ensuring compliance to regulation with
high product integrity and customised crop
advisory via mobile phone, disseminated to
around 17,000 farmers.

Since ITC is vertically integrated to a large
extent, it provides unique opportunities
for establishing synergy and thereby
minimising environmental impacts through
optimum utilisation of raw materials, reuse/
recycling of wastes and optimum logistics.
As explained earlier, agri-commodities
being the key raw materials for most of
ITC’s businesses, they are accorded prime
focus for addressing supply chain issues.
ITC’s interventions in this domain along with

For further details about our relationship
with the agri-supply chain, please refer to
‘Social Investments – Mission Sunehra Kal’
section in this Report.

Sustainability in
the Value Chain

Supply
Chain
community development initiatives have
not only supported sustainable agricultural
practices but also contributed to sustainable
livelihood creation for farmers. Thus, material
sustainability issues specific to environment
have been taken care of to a large extent.
In addition, ITC’s sustainability policies, for
which each Business has developed specific
phase-wise implementation plans, and
associated code of conduct for vendors and
suppliers provide the necessary framework
to deal with aspects associated with labour
practices, human rights, bribery, corruption,
occupational health, safety and environment
in the entire value chain.
Further, in line with the overall strategy to
embed the principles of sustainability, as
far as practicable, into the various stages
of product or service life-cycle, ITC initiated
life cycle assessments (LCA) of its products
& services in 2010 with an objective to
evaluate the impacts and identify areas
for improvement in the value chain. So far,
LCAs have been carried out for selected
product categories from Paperboards &
Specialty Papers, Packaging & Printing and
the Lifestyle Retailing Businesses which
have helped in identifying broad areas for
improvements within as well as beyond ITC’s
boundary. These assessments have been
followed up with detailed studies which
in turn have provided concrete solutions
towards more efficient packaging designs,
loading efficiencies and consequent
reduction in transportation costs/GHG
emissions/energy use. ITC will continue
to work in this direction, in line with its
Policy on Life-cycle Sustainability, to identify
the opportunities for improvement in the
value chain and take appropriate measures
for optimisation.
In line with its commitment to extend the
Triple Bottom Line philosophy along our
supply chain, ITC, as a preliminary step in
2013-14, started including the Notebooks
manufacturers of ESPB which contributed
to around 90% of the total business of ESPB,
within the reporting boundary. The material
aspects of these exclusive TPMs are included
in this Report. During the year, engagements
were made with these key supply chain
partners to enhance their environmental
and social performance. Specific guidelines

had been prepared for the Notebook
manufacturers and Agarbatti Units, to help
them mitigate the various environmental and
safety risks associated with their operations.
Similarly, efforts have been extended to
train our Wholesale Distributors’ employees
on 2-wheeler safety. Going forward, ITC
will continue to make efforts and provide
support to its supply chain members in
these aspects. In 2013-14, ATC Limited, an
associate company had been brought within
the reporting boundary, where support had
been extended in implementing systems
and process to improve the sustainability
performance
of
its
manufacturing
operations. Further, as committed in last
year’s Sustainability Report, 2 TPMs of the
Cigarettes Business have been included in
this year’s reporting boundary and necessary
knowledge support was provided in specific
areas like energy and water conservation,
material utilisation, etc.

Life cycle
assessments have
been carried
out for selected
product categories
from Paperboards
& Specialty Papers,
Packaging &
Printing and the
Lifestyle Retailing
Businesses which
have helped
in identifying
broad areas for
improvements

The Road Ahead
ITC will continue to work along with the
supply chain partners in line with its
policies to enhance their understanding
and performance on sustainability aspects.
Businesses will progressively move towards
monitoring the performance of key supply
chain partners on identified material aspects
and reporting on them.

29

Major Awards
and Accolades –
2014-15
	 ITC was ranked as “India’s Most Admired
Company” in a survey conducted by
Fortune India magazine and Hay Group.

n

	 ITC featured among the top 3 Companies
in terms of corporate reputation in
the 2014-15 Nielsen Corporate Image
Monitor. It has also retained the top
position in terms of being ‘the most active
in CSR’ for the fourth year in a row.

n

Certifications,
Honours and
Awards

	 ITC Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar was
conferred the Indian Visionary —
Business Leader Award by The Economic
Times, India’s leading business daily,
for being the country’s most visionary
corporate leader who has made
“significant contribution to business
growth, organisational transformation
and setting forth examples of industry
initiatives and trends”.

n

	 Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar was conferred
the Management Man of the Year Award
by the Bombay Management Association
(BMA), one of India’s oldest and premier
Management Associations. The award was
conferred on Mr Deveshwar in recognition
of his contribution to entrepreneurship, the
management movement and Indian Industry.

n

	 ITC was voted the ‘Buzziest Brand’ in the
‘Corporate’ category by afaqs, one of the
world’s largest marketing and advertising
portals. In addition ‘Sunfeast’ and ‘Vivel’
were voted ‘Buzziest Brands’ in the Foods
and Personal Care categories, respectively.

n

	 ITC received the CSR Impact Award in
the ‘Livelihoods’ category, conferred by
NGOBOX, Asia’s biggest development
sector platform.

n

	 ITC was conferred the Legal Era IP Award
for the ‘Best IP Team of the Year- FMCG’.

n

	 ITC’s Foods Business received the ‘Overall
Excellence in Procurement Award’ and
‘Outstanding Green Initiative Award’ from
Conference Asia.

n

30

	 ITC was selected as the top Indian company
in the “Cigarettes Sector” at the ‘Dun &
Bradstreet Corporate Awards, 2014’.

n

	 ITC Hotels won the ‘Best Luxury Hotel
Chain of the Year’ award at the 10th
Hospitality India and Explore the World
Annual International Awards.

n

	 ITC’s Education and Stationery Products
Brand, ‘Classmate’ was voted the “Most
Popular School Accessories Brand” at the
‘Child Most Popular Awards’ 2014.

n

	 ITC’s Packaging & Printing Business
won 4 ‘World Star Awards’ from the
World Packaging Organisation, 4 ‘Asia
Star Awards’ from the Asian Packaging
Federation and 17 ‘India Star Awards’
from the Indian Institute of Packaging for
excellence in packaging solutions.

n

	 ITC Infotech was accorded the ‘Award
for Delivering Business Value in
European Outsourcing’ by the European
Outsourcing Association (EOA).

n

	 ITC Infotech was featured in the Leader’s
Category for the 8th consecutive year in
the 2014 Global Outsourcing 100 by the
International Association of Outsourcing
Professionals (IAOP).

n

	 Time Food and Nightlife Awards for ITC
Hotels – Pan Asian, Dum Pukht and West
View Bar & Grill (ITC Sonar, Kolkata);
Peshawri,
Chandravanshi
Pavilion,
Sheesh Mahal and Jal Mahal (ITC
Rajputana, Jaipur) and K&K (ITC Grand
Central, Mumbai).

n

	 ITC Maratha, Mumbai, was conferred the
13th Annual Greentech Safety Award 2014
for excellence in fire & safety management.

n

	 The Central Quality Assurance Laboratory
of ITC Foods located at ITC Life Sciences
and Technology Centre, Bengaluru has
received ‘Certificate of Accreditations’
from the National Board for Testing and
Calibration Laboratories (NABL) in both
Chemical and Biological (Microbiology)
fields, in accordance with ISO 17025
– 2005, certifying the technical
competence of the laboratory (personnel
and infrastructure).

n

	 ITC Grand Chola was named the ‘Best
Business Hotel’ at the 3rd Annual Lonely
Planet Magazine Travel Awards 2014.
The Hotel was also accorded the ‘Signum
Virtutis’ (Seal of Excellence) in the Hotels
& Resorts category at the Seven Star
Global Luxury Awards.

n

	
ITC’s
Corporate
Communications
Department has bagged three First prizes
and one Third prize at the prestigious
Public Relations Society of India (PRSI)
National Awards 2014.

n

	 ITC Limited and Dum Pukht Restaurant
at ITC Maurya won the CNBC Awaaz
Travel Awards 2014 presented by Madhya
Pradesh Tourism. ITC Limited won the
“Emerging Trend in Indian Tourism –
Responsible and Sustainable Tourism”
award, while Dum Pukht won the “Best
Dining Experience” award.

n

	 The Kovai Unit of ITC’s Paperboards
and Specialty Papers Business received
the Tamil Nadu state award for ‘Green
Initiatives and Environmental Best
Practices’, by the Ministry of Environment,
Government of Tamil Nadu, and the Tamil
Nadu Pollution Control Board.

n

	 ITC’s Factory at Bengaluru received the
‘Overall Leader’ Award at the Frost &
Sullivan Green Manufacturing Excellence
Award & Summit 2014.

n

	 ITC’s Units at Bengaluru and Saharanpur
received the ‘Platinum’ and ‘Gold’ Awards
respectively at the India Manufacturing
Excellence Awards (IMEA) instituted by
Frost & Sullivan and The Economic Times.

n

	 ITC’s Factories in Bengaluru, Munger and
Ranjangaon were conferred the ‘Energy
Efficient Unit’ by the Confederation of
Indian Industry (CII).

n

	 ITC Windsor, Bengaluru received the
‘National Energy Management Award
2014’, while the Bhadrachalam and Kovai
Units of ITC’s Paperboards Business
received the ‘Excellent Energy Efficient
Unit’ awards from the Confederation of
Indian Industry (CII).

n

	 ITC Windsor Bengaluru received the
‘Corporate Sustainability Stewardship
Award 2014’ at the Parivartan
Sustainability Leadership Summit in
recognition of the resource management
leadership demonstrated by the hotel.

n

	 ITC’s Unit at Kovai bagged the ‘Award of
Honour’ from the National Safety Council.

n

	 ITC’s Unit at Saharanpur and the Packaging
& Printing Unit at Munger received the
First Prize (Gold) at the 4th FICCI Safety
System Excellence Awards.

n

	ITC Hotels received the Business
Leadership in Sustainability Award from

n

ITC was ranked
as “India’s
Most Admired
Company” in a
survey conducted
by Fortune India
magazine and Hay
Group

31

Sustainable
Livelihoods

ITC Grand Chola
was named the
‘Best Business
Hotel’ at the 3rd
Annual Lonely
Planet Magazine
Travel Awards 2014

the World Green Building Council, Asia
Pacific Network.
n

Major Awards over
the Years
n

n

n

n

n

n

n

n

32

ITC’s Unit at Bhadrachalam won the first
prize in a Six Sigma Case Study Contest
organised by the Indian Statistical
Institute in Bengaluru.

Development, presented by the then
Finance Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee
(2010).
n

Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar received the
Business Person of the Year Award from
UK Trade & Investment (2006).

n

Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar was awarded
the SAM/SPG Sustainability Leadership
Award in Zurich (2007).

n

The National Award for Excellence in
Corporate Governance from the Institute
of Company Secretaries of India (2007).

Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar was
conferred the Padma Bhushan by the
Government of India (2011).

n

Harvard Business Review ranked ITC
Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar as the 7th
Best Performing CEO in the World in its
January-February 2013 edition.

n

Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar was conferred
the Global Leadership Award by the
US India Business Council of the US
Chamber of Commerce (2010).
ITC Chairman Mr Y C Deveshwar was
conferred the Business Leader of the
Year Award by the All India Management
Association (AIMA).
ITC’s Chief Financial Officer, Mr Rajiv
Tandon, was ranked the ‘Best Overall CFO’
at the ‘Business Today - Yes Bank Best
CFO Awards 2013’. He was also declared
the winner in the category of ‘Sustained
Wealth Creation (large companies)’.
ITC was presented the World Business
and Development Award at the historic
Rio+20 UN Summit for its Social and Farm
Forestry initiative.
ITC has been presented the AIM Asian
CSR Award by the Asian Forum on
Corporate Social Responsibility (AFCSR),
in recognition of its contribution to
the creation of sustainable livelihoods
and fostering economic growth in rural
communities in India.
ITC
won
the
prestigious
12th
Businessworld FICCI CSR Award in the
Large Enterprise category. The award
recognises the most socially responsible
Indian corporates in CSR.

n

The FICCI Outstanding Vision Corporate
Triple Impact Award, presented by the then
Prime Minister, Dr Manmohan Singh (2008).

n

The FICCI Award for Outstanding
Achievement in Rural and Community

n

n

ITC was ranked 2nd among top Indian
companies in the first of its kind Standard
& Poor Environmental, Social and
Corporate Governance ratings (2008).
ITC ranked 2nd among top companies in
India and 7th in Asia in the first of its kind
Asian Sustainability Rating released by
CSR Asia (2010).
ITC became the first Indian Company to
gain Membership with WWF-GFTN for
Responsible Forestry (2010).
ITC was ranked the world’s 6th largest
sustainable value creator among
consumer goods companies according
to a report by Boston Consulting Group
(2010).

n

ITC won the top UNIDO Award at the
International Conference on Sharing
Innovative Agri Business Solutions at
Cairo (2008).

n

ITC was conferred the Corporate Social
Responsibility Crown Award for Water
Practices from UNESCO and Water
Digest (2008).

Certifications,
Honours and Awards
SA 8000: Social Accountability
Leaf processing plants at Chirala, Anaparti
and Mysuru, Cigarette factory at Kolkata,
Packaging and Printing Unit at Tiruvottiyur
and Haridwar and ITC Infotech Bengaluru.
Food Safety: ISO 22000/HACCP Food Safety
Management System
ITC Maurya, ITC Mughal, ITC Maratha, ITC
Grand Central, ITC Sonar, ITC Windsor, ITC
Kakatiya, ITC Rajputana, WelcomHotel
New Delhi and My Fortune Chennai and
Foods Units in Haridwar and Pune.
n

n

n

n

n

The Asian CSR Award for Environmental
Excellence, given by the Asian Institute of
Management (2007).
ITC was the 1st Indian Company and 2nd
in the world to win the Development
Gateway Award for its trail-blazing
e-Choupal initiative (2005).
Inaugural World Business Award by UNDP
for ITC’s e-Choupal initiative (2004).
ITC e-Choupal won the Stockholm
Challenge Award (2006).
ITC was rated amongst Asia-Pacific’s 50
biggest listed companies in ‘Asia Fab 50’
by Forbes (2010).

n

All ITC’s premium luxury hotels accorded
LEED® Platinum certification, making ITC
Hotels the ‘Greenest Luxury Hotel Chain
in the World’ (2011).

n

ITC’s Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Units at Bhadrachalam, Bollaram, Kovai
and Tribeni are FSC Chain of Custody
certified (2011).

n

ITC’s Unit in Bhadrachalam has been
awarded the Forest Stewardship Council
Forest Management (FSC-FM) certification
by the SmartWood Programme of the
Rainforest Alliance (2011).

EHS Certifications
ISO 14001: Environment Management System
Manufacturing units and Hotels of ITC
(except new commissioned units; ITC Grand
Bharat, My Fortune, Bengaluru and Foods
unit at Malur) and the ITC Life Sciences &
Technology Centre at Bengaluru.
OHSAS 18001: Occupational Health &
Safety Management Systems
Manufacturing Units of ITC (except the newly
commissioned Foods Unit at Malur)

LEED® Platinum Rating by US Green Building
Council – Existing Building category
Hotels: ITC Maurya, ITC Windsor, ITC Maratha,
ITC Grand Central, ITC Mughal, ITC Sonar, ITC
Kakatiya and ITC Rajputana.
LEED® Platinum Rating by Indian Green
Building Council – New Construction
category
ITC Gardenia, ITC Grand Chola and My
Fortune Bengaluru.
LEED® Platinum Rating by Indian Green
Building Council – Green Factory Building
ITC’s Units at Saharanpur, Bengaluru, Munger
and Pune.
Green Rating for Integrated Habitat
Assessment (GRIHA) by The Energy and
Resources Institute (TERI) and Ministry
of New & Renewable Energy (MNRE),
Government of India
5 star rating for ITC Grand Chola.
LEED® Gold Rating by Indian Green Building
Council
Packaging and Printing Unit at Haridwar and
Leaf processing plant at Mysuru.
TM

FOREST STEWARDSHIP COUNCIL - Chain
of Custody and Controlled Wood by
Rainforest Alliance
Paperboards and Specialty Paper Units at
Bhadrachalam, Tribeni, Kovai and Bollaram.
BEE 5 Star Rating by the Bureau of Energy
Efficiency, Government of India
ITC Green Centre at Manesar.
LEED® Platinum Rating (core & shell) by
Indian Green Building Council and LEED®
Platinum Rating (commercial interiors) by
US Green Building Council
ITC Green Centre at Manesar.

33

Stakeholder
Engagement, Risks
& Opportunities and
Materiality Analysis

Stakeholder
Engagement
ITC has a structured approach to address
stakeholders’ concerns, in line with
the Company’s policy on stakeholder
engagement. The approach draws upon the
long term stable relationships built with
key stakeholders such as shareholders,
farmers, customers, suppliers, employees,
local communities, regulatory bodies and
the media. Recognising that stakeholder
engagement is an integral part of enriching
partnerships, ITC has institutionalised these
existing relationships through appropriate

processes. Targeted consultations are being
conducted on a regular basis, with due
weightage given to each stakeholder’s nature
of engagement with the organisation. The
stakeholder engagement processes focus on:
l
l

l

l

l

Transparency and accountability
Monitoring and tracking of key concerns
expressed by those who have been consulted
Timely reporting back to those consulted
on ITC’s action plan
Periodic review of actions taken for
redressal of concerns
Continued integration with materiality
identification

ITC’s Process of Stakeholder Engagement

Stakeholder Engagement

Identification of key
stakeholders

Identification and
prioritisation of
concerns and needs

Consultation with the
key stakeholders

Addressing the
prioritised concerns
and needs in a
consistent and
transparent manner

Details of each of the above mentioned steps are elaborated below.
Identification of Key Stakeholders

Identification
and profiling of
stakeholders who are
directly/indirectly
impacted by business
activities as well as
directly/indirectly
influence business
activities

Consideration of
- existing
relationship of the
stakeholder with
the organisation,
- stakeholders’
reliance on the
organisation,
- willingness to
engage and
- level of influence

Stakeholders’
identification guided
by the attributes
such as dependency,
responsibility,
immediacy and
influence

Selection of
stakeholder
representatives
ensuring that they
genuinely represent
the views of their
constituents,
and faithfully
communicate
the results of the
engagements with
ITC, back to their
constituents

35

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Consultation with Key Stakeholders and Identification of Key Concerns
Highlighted below are the consultation mechanisms with the key stakeholders, together with key concerns, requirements and
expectations identified through them.
Stakeholder
Providers
of Financial
Capital

Consultation Mechanism

Key Issues

	 Annual General Meeting

l

	 Exclusive section in Corporate Website on
‘Shareholder Value’ which serves to inform and
service shareholders

l

l
l

	 An exclusive e-mail id: isc@itc.in for direct
interaction with shareholders

l

	 Continued profitability and growth of the
organisation
	 Transparent and effective communications
	 Investor servicing

l

	 Anti-corruption, whistle blower mechanism

l

	 Regular interventions with institutional investors

l

Government
and
Regulatory
Authorities

	 Representations on policy issues through
industry associations and other bodies

l

	 Participation in policy advocacy discussions at
various forums

l

	 Regulatory compliance

l

	 Strong governance

l

	Anti-corruption

l

	 Tax revenues

l

	 Resource efficiency

l

	 Transparency in disclosures

l

	 Livelihood generation

l

Customers

	 Market surveys

l

	 Personal contacts/visits

l

	 Personalised lifestyle privilege programme

l

	 Customer satisfaction surveys

l

	 Joint development and improvement projects

l

	 Key account management

l

l
l
l
l
l
l

	 Fair and competitive pricing
	 Product/service quality
	 Transparent communication to consumers
	 Adequate information on products
	 Product/service availability
	 Timely delivery of product/service
	 Maintenance of privacy/confidentiality

l

Employees

	 Induction programmes/training workshops

l

	 Individual performance appraisal

l

	 Employee engagement survey

l

	 Grievance handling processes

l

l
l
l
l

	 Caring and empowering work environment
	 Personal development and growth
	 Employee safety
	 Grievance resolution
	 Competitive compensation

l

Farmers

	 Regular formal/informal talks

l

	 Agreements for all procurement activities

l

l
l

	 e-Choupal and Choupal Pradarshan Khets
(demonstration farms)

l

	 Inputs on agricultural best practices
	 Know-how on improvement of productivity
and profitability
	 Consistent increase in income generation

l

	 Capacity development for further investment

l

	 Sustainable & accelerated growth in
livelihoods and farm incomes

l

	 Responsible sourcing of agri-raw materials

l

36

Stakeholder Engagement, Risks
& Opportunities and Materiality Analysis

Stakeholder
Supply Chain
Partners

Consultation Mechanism

Key Issues

	 Manufacturers’ meets

l

	 Vendor meets

l

l
l

	 Pre-agreement negotiations

l

	 Agreements for all procurement activities

l

	 Knowledge and infrastructure support
	 Regular communication and updates on
business plans
	 Inclusion of local medium and small scale
enterprises in vendor base

l

	 Competency development of local vendors

l

	 Stability/tenure of relationship

l

	 Ordering and payment routines

l

	 Purchasing prices

l

	 Changes or cancellation of orders

l

Local
Communities

	 Community needs assessment activities
undertaken in collaboration with independent
parties/Civil Society Organisations

l

	 Community development programmes based
on local communities’ needs

l

	 Strengthens livelihood opportunities

l

	 Formation and regular meetings of village
institutions

l

	 Public hearings during greenfield/expansion
projects

l

l

l

	 Improvement of social infrastructure for
hygienic and healthy living environment
	 Dignity of life through economic & social
empowerment

	 Assessment of direct and indirect impacts of ITC’s
social investments on communities

l

Media

	 One-on-one Media interactions

l

	 Press conferences/Press releases

l

	 Responsible Corporate Citizenship

	Advertisements/Promotions

l

	 Interviews with Senior Managers

l

l
l

Civil Society

	 Transparent and accurate disclosure to
stakeholders

l

	 Partnership in implementation of CSR
Programmes under Mission Sunehra Kal

l

	 Discussions on community issues with Civil
Society Organisations

l

	 Corporate Reputation

	 Financial support for community
development programmes

l

	 Managerial support

l

	 Environmental pollution prevention

l

	 Safe products and services

l

	 Responsible Corporate Citizenship

l

37

Sustainable
Livelihoods

ITC has classified
its sustainability
challenges into two
broad categories
– those that are
influenced by
global events, and
challenges that are
unique to India

Prioritisation and Addressal of
Key Concerns

effectively address the emerging challenges
in a dynamic business environment.

The sensitivity of an issue to a stakeholder and
to ITC, in terms of high/low importance forms
the basis of the materiality analysis. Please
refer to the Materiality Analysis section for
further details.

Based on the ongoing risk assessments
at Businesses level and aggregated at the
organisation level, ITC has classified its
sustainability challenges into two broad
categories – those that are influenced by
global events, and challenges that are unique
to India.

Risks and
Opportunities:
Sustainability
Challenges
Sustainability Risk Portfolio
As a diversified enterprise, ITC has always
upheld a system-based approach to business
risk management. The Corporate Risk
Management Cell works with the Businesses
to establish and monitor the specific
profiles including strategic, operational,
environmental and social risks. The process
includes the prioritisation of risks, selection of
appropriate mitigation strategies and periodic
reviews of the progress on the management of
risks. The annual planning exercise requires
all Businesses to clearly identify their top
risks and set out a mitigation plan with agreed
timelines and accountability. The senior
management of the Company also periodically
reviews the risk management framework to
keep it contemporary and relevant so as to

38

Global Challenges
According to the World Economic Forum
Report on Global Risks 2015, short term
risks that endanger the world today arise as
a direct outcome of human action, including
interstate conflicts, collapse of states,
governance deficits and large-scale terrorist
attacks. On the other hand, the list for long
term global risks is dominated by those
related to physical and environmental issues
that have been less prominent in recent
headlines, such as climate change and food
& water security. Although the importance
of these slow-burning issues have been
recognised by the world at large, little
progress has been made to address them in
light of their detrimental and far-reaching
consequences for the current and future
generations. The expected impact of climate
change on the ability to grow food and access
water could further exacerbate population
migrations, thereby threatening the socioeconomic stability of receiving countries.

Stakeholder Engagement, Risks
& Opportunities and Materiality Analysis

Another growing concern is unemployment
and underemployment further contributing
to social and rising socio-economic
inequality. This is reflected in the fact that
among the members of the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD), the average income of the richest
10% has now grown to about nine times that
of the poorest 10%.
The anticipated and real impacts for the above
issues amongst developed and developing
countries are however vastly different, both
in scale and scope. These differences are
multi-layered and multi-faceted given the
dimensions of the challenges and the socioeconomic environment prevailing in different
countries. Given this context, countries like
India while cognising for the larger global
challenges, will have to shape their own
sustainability agenda with focus on specific
issues that have an immediate and direct
impact on the Indian society at large.

The Indian Context
It becomes essential to understand in this
context that while India mirrors many of the
global challenges, issues like poverty, social
inequities, unemployment, environmental
degradation, water and food crises assume
even more acute and multi-dimensional
characteristics in India. Land pressure for
instance, assumes greater significance in
India which is home to 17% of the world’s

population, with only 2.4% of the world’s
land share.
Agriculture in India engages around 50
per cent of the country’s workforce and
supports the livelihoods of 75 per cent of
the population living below the poverty
line. Ironically however, agriculture today
accounts for just about 14 per cent of GDP
and therefore, the average farmer’s per
capita income is less than one-fifth of the
rest of the country’s average. Such low
incomes are a result of a deteriorating natural
resource base, disconnected value chains,
fragmented and small-size landholdings,
weak infrastructure, inadequate knowledge
and multiple intermediaries. In addition,
around 55% of India’s total sown area meets
its requirements from rainwater alone.
This assumes importance in the face of
climate change related challenges of erratic
rainfall leading to drought and floods. A
majority of the farmers are hence trapped
in a vicious cycle of low productivity and
low investments. Therefore there is a need
to address these challenges by means of
ensuring farming population’s sustainable
access to water, knowledge and other
necessary resources, whilst simultaneously
arranging for diversifying the income base for
India’s workforce aligned with Government of
India’s “Make in India” campaign.
The other risks that India faces are inadequate
infrastructure and the failure of urban

ITC’s operations
and markets are
India centric and
the Company’s
world-class Indian
brands ensure
that larger value is
created, captured
and retained
in the country
for national
development and
growth

39

Sustainable
Livelihoods
planning in the face of rapid urbanisation.
As per a World Bank Study “Power for All:
ELECTRICITY ACCESS CHALLENGE IN INDIA”
published in November 2014, around 311
million people in India still remain without
access to electricity. Of these, more than
100 million currently are beyond the reach
of the grid and can be reached only by using
decentralised household or village systems.
On the other hand, rapid urbanisation,
increasing population, higher consumption
levels and inadequate infrastructure are
putting a severe strain on the ecology. A large
amount of waste being generated today ends
up in landfills, leading to serious concerns
of public health and sanitation risks as well
as large scale environmental degradation.
Negative impacts of urbanisation are also
manifest in the pollution of almost all Indian
rivers that have been absorbing domestic and
industrial sewage and agricultural wastes
over the last few decades. Apart from posing
a serious health problem to millions of

people that continue to depend on polluted
water from rivers, this also endangers the
biodiversity dependant on it. It is therefore
the need of the hour for the country to invest
in basic infrastructure. This will further
require enormous resources that can only be
generated with a larger focus on livelihood
creation and widening of the tax base.
ITC’s operations and markets are India
centric and the Company’s world-class
Indian brands ensure that larger value is
created, captured and retained in the country
for national development and growth.
Therefore the organisation’s sustainability
is closely driven by the country’s advantages
and vulnerabilities. In line with the risks
and opportunities that may impact India’s
economic, social and environmental
sustainability, ITC has mapped the key
challenges, risks and opportunities likely
to impact its own long-term prospects and
those of its stakeholders.

p

Health and Safety

Human Capital and
Well-being

pu
lat
ion
rtn
e
rs
Sa
tis
fac
tio
n

Dynamics of Government Policies
and Regulations

t
ver
Po

ite
Lim
oc
fS
so
ge
len
Chal

y an

d Social Ineq
uit
y

Lo
w

Sustainable Use of
Natural Resources

se
ia
dU
nd
f I y an e s
t
ili ourc
s

Co
r

po
r

nt
me
ge
na

ion
Wa
tat
u
ste
p
e
a
d
g
e
f
r
i
c
n
i
u
ltur
M
f ra
o
eR
a
a
t
y
l se
a
vit
u
S
s
i
t
a
c
i
n
t
a
t
b
c
o
r
of Na le Av
du
tur ail o
ro
al ab
Re
Continued
Profitability

Po
al
c
Ca
Lo
Pa
Employability of
n
pa
i
ia
bil
ha
lM
r
itie
ly C
p
s of S
ed
p
me
u
o
mall Scale S
t
ia
s
Cu
d

Own Operations

40

Supply Chain

Customer/Consumer Space

Catchment Areas

Stakeholder Engagement, Risks
& Opportunities and Materiality Analysis
Challenges

Risks and Opportunities

Own Operations
Continued
Profitability

RISKS
	 High incidence of taxation and a discriminatory regulatory regime on cigarettes has been leading
to a significant shift in tobacco consumption to cheaper and revenue inefficient forms like bidis,
chewing tobacco etc. and also to cheaper tax-evaded as well as contraband cigarettes.

l

OPPORTUNITIES
	 ITC’s strength lies in its multiple drivers of growth which leverages its enterprise strengths such as
consumer insights, innovative product development, brand building, state-of-the-art manufacturing,
efficient supply chain and distribution infrastructure, world-class human capital and sustained
investments in R&D.

l

Sustainable
Use of Natural
Resources

RISKS
	 Increased water scarcity may directly impact ITC’s Paperboards and Specialty Papers Business
which is relatively more water intensive in its operations compared to other ITC Businesses. With
continuous decline in ground water and uneven supply of surface water, it may become even more
challenging for Businesses to meet their requirements. Disruptions in rainfall patterns will also
impact water quality requiring additional treatment and costs before it can become usable. These
challenges may bring about further regulatory pressure on water withdrawal.

l

	 Challenges related to energy security due to volatile energy prices and inadequate infrastructure
for capitalising on off-site renewable sources of energy in the country.

l

OPPORTUNITIES
	 These risks provide an immediate stimuli to focus on energy conservation and maximising
contribution from renewable energy sources. This should provide long-term advantages in
terms of both reduced costs as well as reliability of support. ITC would also enjoy first mover
advantage by developing internal systems and processes to operate in such a natural resource
constrained environment.

l

	 Integrated Watershed Development Programme to increase availability of water and
recharge aquifers.

l

Health and
Safety

RISKS
	 While ITC is progressing steadily towards its target of zero accidents of employees within its
premises, ITC cognises that accidents while traveling to and from the workplace are on the
rise in India, given the steady proliferation of 2 wheelers, the poor conditions of roads and
inadequate infrastructure.
l	 Given ITC’s presence in the FMCG and Hospitality sectors, constant vigilance is required to monitor
the health and safety impacts of its products and services on consumers.
l

OPPORTUNITIES
	 Safe work environment is critical in boosting employee morale and productivity. Apart from bestin-class infrastructure, ITC’s opportunity lies in its robust systems that have been developed
over the years to ensure safety of employees within ITC premises as well as outside premises.
ITC employees can also act as ambassadors for safety and play an individual role in creating
awareness on this vital aspect.

l

	 Creating a culture of safety through appropriate behavioural interventions.

l

	 ITC has well established systems and processes to ensure that its products and services are
delivered in compliance with national or international standards as relevant. In service sectors such
as Hospitality, these strengths have permitted ITC to leverage the market to its advantage.

l

41

Sustainable
Livelihoods
Challenges
Dynamics of
Government
Policies and
Regulation

Risks and Opportunities
RISKS
	 The Cigarette industry had to contend with a steep increase in Excise Duty for three years in
succession along with discriminatory and punitive increases in Value Added Tax (VAT) rates by some
States. Such tax increases undermine the legal domestic cigarette industry by providing a large
arbitrage to the tax-evaded and contraband suppliers. This sub-optimises the revenue potential
from this sector, diminishes the share of the legal industry besides failing to achieve the objective
of tobacco control in the country.

l

	 Strong regulations like Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act were put up to curb excessive
speculation in agri-value chain and to allow farmers efficient access to the market without the
exploitation of intermediaries. But such regulations today limit sufficient flexibility for farmers and
deprive them of maximum value. In addition, regulations like the Essential Commodities Act (ECA),
which impose stock limits and curb movements from time to time, create uncertainty in business
viability for organisations like ITC with significant dependence on agri-inputs. This acts as a huge
deterrent to long-term investments required to build infrastructure like climate-controlled storages
and transport facilities to prevent wastage.

l

	 Multi-layered and complicated system of environmental and labour laws in the country reduce
overall competitiveness.

l

	 Moreover, possible regulatory measures such as carbon taxes or additional requirements under the
Perform, Achieve, Trade (PAT) and Renewable Energy Certificates (REC) schemes can put additional
cost burdens.

l

OPPORTUNITIES
	 ITC has created strong Indian brands in the cigarettes segment, in the absence of which, the
domestic market would have been more vulnerable to the onslaught of smuggled tax evaded
cigarettes of foreign origin. Raising the awareness of policy makers and civil society on the menace
of illegal and contraband cigarettes, which impact both revenue and livelihoods of farmers would
help in enhancing enforcement as well as stemming the rapid increase of the illegal industry. This
will lead to eliminating the losses to the exchequer as a result of tax evaded cigarettes, and also
help in ensuring that livelihoods of farmers and others in the value chain are not lost.

l

	 ITC engages with industry associations, organisations and other appropriate forums in line with its
Policy of Responsible Advocacy. This is aimed to help the formulation of a balanced and pragmatic
policy framework that addresses the concerns of the industry.

l

Human Capital
and Wellbeing

RISKS
	 ITC operates in a diversified, ever-changing, highly competitive global landscape. This necessitates
the development of a strong, customer responsive world-class human capital base. The challenge of
meeting the growing needs of an organisation with the requisite skills co-exists with the challenge
of attracting and retaining the best talents given the multitude of options available to skilled
professionals.

l

	 There is also a need to nurture harmonious employee relations to enable smooth functioning and
productivity enhancement to be able to support the organisation’s growth and progress.

l

OPPORTUNITIES
	 In order to sustain growth and to continue to deliver value for stakeholders, it is necessary for
organisations to recognise human capital as a critical resource base. The over 100-year-old brand
value of ITC provides an opportunity to attract talent from premier institutions. Retention of such a
talent pool is in turn facilitated through a talent management strategy focused upon building a high
quality ‘future-ready’ pool of managers, specialists and business leaders, supported by significant
investments in learning and development and backed by a culture of care and concern.

l

42

Stakeholder Engagement, Risks
& Opportunities and Materiality Analysis
Challenges

Risks and Opportunities

Catchment Areas
Sustainable
Availability
and Use
of Natural
Resources

RISKS
	 Rapid growth in population and unplanned urbanisation has led to consumption of natural
resources at a rate far higher than the earth’s capacity to regenerate. Sustainable availability
of resources for industrial use as well as domestic consumption could therefore be a risk in the
catchment areas of ITC.

l

OPPORTUNITIES
	 ITC’s deep rooted stakeholder centric approach and understanding of interdependence of social
and environmental aspects have enabled ITC to be a pioneer in identifying sustainability issues
beyond the horizon and taking necessary actions. This is manifested in integrated watershed
development as well as afforestation programmes initiated by ITC more than a decade ago for
ensuring augmentation of natural resources and enabling higher productivity, creating a green
cover and restoring soil health.

l

Employability
of local
population

RISKS
	 Lack of proper education and inadequate availability of requisite skills in local population, especially
from disadvantaged sections of society in the catchment areas is a challenge faced by most of ITC’s
manufacturing units. This points to the compelling need to create a large pool of skilled human
resources from among the local populace.

l

OPPORTUNITIES
	 ITC’s deep engagement with rural communities, which has been enhanced by the co-creation of
economic opportunities, has helped in forging strong relationships. This provides an opportunity to
enhance gainful livelihoods of local population.

l

	 ITC’s partnership with local Industrial Training Institutes and agencies that impart vocational
training on skills related to sales & distribution, hospitality, construction and technology acts as
an opportunity to enhance the employability of youth from disadvantaged sections of society in the
catchment areas of ITC operations.

l

Poverty and
Social Inequity

RISKS
	 Nearly 700 million people living in rural India, with low adaptive capacities, have a direct and
symbiotic dependence on climate sensitive sectors (agriculture, forest and fisheries) and natural
resources (water, bio-diversity, mangroves, coastal zones and grasslands) for their subsistence
and livelihood.

l

	 The limited options of alternative off-farm employment, combined with endemic poverty, continue
to imperil the livelihood of millions of small and marginal farmers with fragmented landholdings,
mainly in rain-fed agriculture regions, where the production regime is inherently fragile and getting
more so due to a number of factors.

l

OPPORTUNITIES
	 ITC’s innovative development models based upon the foundation of its deep rooted stakeholder
centric approach, provide the opportunity of simultaneous generation of sustainable livelihood
as well as creation of positive environmental footprint. Such models unleash strong drivers for
achieving development with social equity. The Company’s approach to develop the competitiveness
of value chains of which it is a part enables the creation of long term drivers that address the
problem of social inequities.

l

43

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Challenges

Risks and Opportunities

Supply Chain
Low
productivity
of rain-fed
agricultural
sector of India

RISKS
	 ITC operates across the agri value chain of 19 crops and is present in 18 states with substantial
investments in resource intensive models that entail heavy capital infrastructure. Since around 55%
of India’s total sown area meets its requirements from rainwater alone, climate change generated
environmental challenges aggravate the risks of low productivity of agricultural sector of India, in
turn impacting sustainability of agri based businesses.

l

	 Low productivity risks are compounded by absence of focussed incentivisation of precision farming,
micro-irrigation, watershed development and power-efficient farm mechanisation.

l

	 There are inadequacies in the policy framework required to boost the provision of rural infrastructure
so that wastage can be eliminated and farmers can receive better returns.

l

	 Furthermore, absence of crop and weather insurance reduce the risk-taking capability of the smallscale farmers for investment in infrastructure improvement.

l

OPPORTUNITIES
	 Owing to long standing presence in the agri-commodities market of the country, ITC has created
a rich knowledge pool of agri-based interventions in terms of infrastructure, connectivity, price
discovery, market access and farm productivity. ITC’s close connect with the grass root level
and effective dissemination of critical information provide opportunities for ITC to address the
challenges in its agri-value chain.

l

Limited
Capabilities
of Small Scale
Supply Chain
Partners

RISKS
	 ITC’s supply chain comprises of a large number of small-scale partners many of whom operate under
limiting circumstances in terms of their ability to invest in efficient technologies and their necessity
to rely on labour intensive practices.

l

OPPORTUNITIES
	 ITC’s long presence in the Indian market has helped in understanding the pulse, strengths,
weaknesses and concerns of its supply chain partners, especially the rural population. This in turn
has helped in forging strong relationships with supply chain partners and in capacity building of
these partners for overcoming their own limitations and maximising value.

l

Customer/Consumer Space
Waste
Management

RISKS
	 Average per capita waste generation of India is lower than that of OECD countries or even other
Asian countries. However, the Indian industry is facing increasing pressure on packaging waste,
which highlights the need for more effective solid waste management.

l

	 Inadequate solid waste management systems result in a large amount of wastes being generated
today to end up in landfills. Heaps of unattended waste, foraged by cattle and rag-pickers alike,
have become a common sight both in urban and rural areas of the country.

l

	 Public concerns on inadequate solid waste management across rural and urban India can initiate
regulatory attention on product packaging.

l

OPPORTUNITIES
	 ITC’s deep rooted stakeholder centric approach and understanding of interdependence of social
and environmental aspects have enabled ITC to be a pioneer in identifying sustainability issues
beyond the horizon and taking necessary actions. This is reflected in the fact that fibre for the Kovai
Unit of Paperboards and Speciality Papers Business of ITC, is sourced from recycled waste. Given
ITC’s century old significant presence in the country and its close connect with the grass root level
change makers, ITC has the opportunity to propagate waste segregation at source at all levels of
society and to facilitate effective collection mechanism whilst generating livelihood for rag-pickers.

l

44

Stakeholder Engagement, Risks
& Opportunities and Materiality Analysis
Challenges
Corporate
Reputation

Risks and Opportunities
RISKS
	 Inadequate information or misrepresentation, especially in the media, can impact corporate
reputation.

l

	 Adverse coverage or feedback on ITC’s brands and Businesses can impact brand salience in the
minds of the consumer/customer.

l

OPPORTUNITIES
	 ITC’s structured media engagement plan comprises an array of activities including press releases/
statements, media interviews by top management, media coverage of important corporate and
business milestones and regular presentations to senior media editors. In addition, presentations
are also made to key stakeholders backed by publications on various issues. These provide an
opportunity to the senior management team to effectively engage with stakeholders on issues
relating to ITC’s products, services, initiatives and business practices.

l

	 During the year, perception surveys have led to ITC being ranked as the ‘Most Admired Indian
Company’ by Fortune India magazine. The latest Neilsen Corporate Image Monitor also lists ITC
among the top 3 companies in India in terms of reputation.

l

Social Media

RISKS
	 The explosion of Social Media, namely web applications like Facebook, Instagram and Twitter, which
allow individuals to form virtual communities of common interest and link up with people across the
globe to share news, views, visuals and videos, is posing a new challenge to organisations.

l

	 Being unregulated, social media allows the instant dissemination of information globally without
any mechanism to verify or authenticate the flow of information. This creates the possibility of
spreading misinformation that can impact consumer behaviour as well as corporate reputation.

l

OPPORTUNITIES
	 ITC has created its own presence in social media leveraging publicly available web applications
as well as creating dedicated branded web applications to disseminate information about the
organisation and its brands in the digital space.

l

	 ITC’s corporate Twitter handle, @itccorpcom provides an opportunity to engage in the social media
space. In addition, ITC has created customised apps for mobile phones to provide superior and
transparent access to information to its stakeholders. ITC’s Facebook page, Hub and Scope has
created a community to also engage with potential employees. Several ITC brands like Bingo!,
Yippee!, Wills Lifestyle and Engage have a social media presence to constantly interact with their
respective target audiences.

l

45

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Materiality Analysis
ITC’s materiality matrix enabled the design of the content of this Report so as to provide a
reasonable and balanced picture of the organisation’s Triple Bottom Line impacts and its
performance. ITC’s materiality analysis is based upon the following three pronged approach.
	 Relevance of GRI G4 defined aspects in terms of
boundary of impacts
l	 Cognition of Sector Specific Issues
l	 Evaluation of relevance to stakeholders
l

IDENTIFICATION OF
MATERIAL ASPECTS

	 Analysis of high or low importance of a particular
aspect based on stakeholder engagement
l	 Evaluation of the stakeholder’s perception of ITC’s
impact with respect to that material aspect
l	 Significance of a material aspect to a particular ITC
business based on ITC’s Corporate Strategies, policies,
risks and opportunities for the Business
l	 Corporate level aggregation of material aspects by
Corporate EHS
l

PRIORITISATION

	 Review by various Corporate Functions
l	 Final review and approval by Sustainability
Compliance Review Committee
l

VALIDATION

Materiality Matrix
Increasing influence on stakeholders’ assessments and decisions

Economic Performance
Local Community Development
Statutory Compliance
Sustainable Livelihoods

Procurement from
Local Suppliers

Employee/Customer Health
and Safety

Employee Engagement

Sustainable Forest Management
Employment
Product Packaging

Anti-corruption

Sustainable Supply Chain

Human Rights

Learning and Development

Transportation
Public Policy Advocacy

Natural Resources
Usage Efficiency

Product Labelling

Marketing Communication

Customer Privacy

Climate Change

Increasing Significance of ITC’s Economic, Environmental and Social Impacts
Economic

46

Environmental

Social

Environmental & Social

Stakeholder Engagement, Risks
& Opportunities and Materiality Analysis

Disclosure on Material Aspects
Sl. No.

Material Aspects

Details Available in Sections

1

Economic Performance

Economic Performance

2

Sustainable Livelihoods

Economic Performance
Social Investments – Mission Sunehra Kal

3

Procurement from Local
Suppliers

Economic Performance

4

Climate Change

Energy
Air Emissions

5

Natural Resources Usage
Efficiency

Energy
Water Management
Recycling and Waste Management
Raw Materials

6

Product Packaging

Product Responsibility
Recycling and Waste Management

7

Transportation

Energy
Air Emissions

8

Sustainable Forest
Management

Raw Materials
Biodiversity

9

Sustainable Supply Chain

Supply Chain

10

Statutory Compliance

Product Responsibility

11

Employment

Labour Practices & Decent Work and Human
Rights

12

Learning and Development

Labour Practices & Decent Work and Human
Rights

13

Employee Engagement

Labour Practices & Decent Work and Human
Rights

14

Human Rights

Labour Practices & Decent Work and Human
Rights

15

Local Community Development

Economic Performance
Social Investments – Mission Sunehra Kal

16

Social Infrastructure

Economic Performance
Social Investments – Mission Sunehra Kal

17

Anti-corruption

Governance Structure

18

Public Policy Advocacy

Responsible Advocacy

19

Employee/Customer Health
and Safety

Occupational Health and Safety
Product Responsibility

20

Product Labelling

Product Responsibility

21

Marketing Communication

Product Responsibility

22

Customer Privacy

Product Responsibility

47

Report Profile,
Scope and
Boundary

The 12th Sustainability Report of the Company
covers the sustainability performance for the
period from April 1, 2014 to March 31, 2015.
ITC reports its performance on an annual
basis and the last Sustainability Report was
published in June 2014.
ITC is headquartered at Virginia House, 37 J L
Nehru Road, Kolkata, 700 071 (India).
The contact point for any clarifications on the
Report or for requesting additional copies of
this Report is Corporate Communications
Department at the above address or e-mail:
enduringvalue@itc.in.
The reporting principles and methodology
are in accordance with the “Comprehensive”
option of the fourth generation Global
Reporting Initiative (GRI) Sustainability
Reporting Guidelines – G4. The Reporting
Principles and Standard Disclosures and
the Implementation Manual of the GRI-G4
Reporting Guidelines have been followed.
The relevant aspects/indicators from GRI-G4
Food Processing Sector Supplement have
also been considered while reporting the
Foods Business performance.
This Report highlights the Triple Bottom Line
dimensions that reflect the organisation’s
significant economic, environmental and
social impacts, or substantively influence the
assessments and decisions of stakeholders.
ITC’s
Businesses/Units
continue
to
proactively engage with key stakeholders,
who either have a major interest or are
significantly affected by the Company’s
operations, products or services. The details
on stakeholder engagement are covered
elsewhere in the Report.
In line with ITC’s Policy on Responsible
Sourcing, the Company continues its efforts
to influence sustainability practices along
the value chain with the intent to cover all
significant supply chain partners in the
years to come. In the current year, ITC has
incorporated in this Report, the performance
of 22 exclusive Third Party Manufacturers
(TPMs) catering to the Notebooks segment of
Education and Stationery Products Business
and 2 TPMs of Cigarettes Business and ATC
Limited, an associate company of ITC.
The economic performance reported
here is excerpted from the Company’s

Report & Accounts (R&A) 2015, audited by
independent External Auditors – M/s Deloitte
Haskins & Sells.
The data in the environment & social sections
of the Report is based on actual performance
of the various businesses, factories, hotels
and large offices of the Company, TPMs
and subsidiary companies as detailed in
the reporting boundary. An Integrated
Sustainability Data Management System
established in the Company to collect,
collate and analyse environmental and social
data, along with strong internal controls,
support overall integrity and credibility of the
disclosures in the Report.
In order to obtain an objective and impartial
assurance on the Report, ITC has been
seeking the same from third party agencies
on all its Sustainability Reports since it
started reporting in 2004. In the current
year, authenticity of the data and systems
disclosed in Sustainability Report 2015
and conformance with ‘in accordance’ –
comprehensive requirements of the GRI G4
guidelines has been verified by M/s KPMG,
an independent third party assurance
provider. They have conducted the assurance
engagement as per the International Standard
for Assurance Engagements (ISAE) 3000 and
have provided assurance, at a ‘reasonable
level’, the statement of which forms a part
of this Report. The assurance statement by
M/s KPMG covers the summary of the work
performed, the manner in which the assurance
engagement has been conducted, the extent
to which ITC has applied GRI G4 Guidelines
and the conclusions on the Report.

The reporting
principles and
methodology are
in accordance
with the
“Comprehensive”
option of the fourth
generation Global
Reporting Initiative
(GRI) Sustainability
Reporting
Guidelines – G4
49

Sustainable
Livelihoods

This Report
highlights the
Triple Bottom
Line dimensions
that reflect the
organisation’s
significant
economic,
environmental and
social impacts,
or substantively
influence the
assessments
and decisions of
stakeholders

Reporting
Boundary

Education and Stationery Products
Business:

ITC Head Office: Kolkata (West Bengal)

Divisional Head Quarters: Chennai
(Tamil Nadu)

FMCG

Third Party Manufacturers of Notebooks –
22 nos.

Trade Marketing and Distribution
(TM&D):
TM&D Head Quarters: Kolkata (West Bengal)

Cigarettes Business:
Divisional Head Quarters: Kolkata
(West Bengal)
Units at:
Kolkata (West Bengal), Bengaluru
(Karnataka), Munger (Bihar), Saharanpur
(Uttar Pradesh) and Pune (Maharashtra)
Third Party Manufacturers – 2 nos.

Matches and Agarbattis Business:
Divisional Head Quarters: Chennai
(Tamil Nadu)

Hotels
Divisional Head Quarters: ITC Green Centre,
Gurgaon (Haryana)

Hotels:
	 ITC Maurya (New Delhi)

l

	 ITC Maratha (Mumbai)

l

FMCG - Others

l

Foods Business:

l

Divisional Head Quarters: Bengaluru
(Karnataka)

l

Units at:
Haridwar (Uttarakhand), Pune (Maharashtra)
and Malur (Karnataka)

Personal Care Products Business:
Divisional Head Quarters: Kolkata
(West Bengal)
Units at:
Haridwar (Uttarakhand) and Manpura
(Himachal Pradesh)

50

	 ITC Grand Central (Mumbai)
	 ITC Sonar (Kolkata)
	 ITC Mughal (Agra)
	 ITC Grand Bharat (Gurgaon)

l

	 ITC Windsor (Bengaluru)

l

	 ITC Gardenia (Bengaluru)

l

	 ITC Rajputana (Jaipur)

l

	 ITC Grand Chola (Chennai)

l

	 My Fortune Chennai

l

	 My Fortune Bengaluru

l

	 WelcomHotel Sheraton New Delhi

l

Report Profile, Scope
and Boundary

Leaf Tobacco Business
Divisional Head Quarters: Guntur
(Andhra Pradesh)
Units at:
Anaparti (Andhra Pradesh), Chirala (Andhra
Pradesh), Mysuru (Karnataka) and Research
Centre, Rajahmundry (Andhra Pradesh)

Lifestyle Retailing Business
and Others
Lifestyle Retailing Business Head Quarters
at ITC Green Centre, Manesar (Haryana),
ITC Life Sciences & Technology Centre,
Bengaluru (Karnataka),

Agri Business

Central Projects Organisation, Bengaluru
(Karnataka)

Divisional Head Quarters: Hyderabad
(Telangana)

Subsidiaries

Paperboards and Specialty
Papers Business
Divisional Head Quarters: Hyderabad
(Telangana)
Units at:
Tribeni (West Bengal), Bhadrachalam
(Telangana), Bollaram (Telangana) and
Kovai (Tamil Nadu)

ITC Infotech India Limited:
Units at:
Bengaluru (Karnataka) and Kolkata
(West Bengal)

Srinivasa Resorts Limited:
Hotel: ITC Kakatiya, Hyderabad (Telangana)

Bay Islands Hotels Limited:
Hotel: Fortune Resort Bay Island, Port Blair

Packaging and Printing
Business
Divisional Head Quarters: Chennai
(Tamil Nadu)
Units at:
Munger (Bihar), Tiruvottiyur (Tamil Nadu)
and Haridwar (Uttarakhand)

Landbase India Limited:
Classic Golf Resort, Gurgaon

Associates
ATC Limited,
Unit at Hosur (Tamil Nadu)

The data in the
environment &
social sections
of the Report is
based on actual
performance of the
various businesses,
factories, hotels
and large offices of
the Company, TPMs
and subsidiary
companies as
detailed in the
reporting boundary

51

Sustainable
Livelihoods
The following subsidiaries included in ITC’s Consolidated Financial Statements are not
included in the Sustainability Report 2015.
Names of Subsidiaries

52

Remarks

Fortune Park Hotels Limited

*

Surya Nepal Private Limited

*

BFIL Finance Limited

@

MRR Trading & Investment Company Limited
(a 100% subsidiary of ITC Investments & Holdings Limited)

@

Russell Credit Limited

@

Greenacre Holdings Limited
(a 100% subsidiary of Russell Credit Limited)

@

Wimco Limited

*

Prag Agro Farm Limited

*

Pavan Poplar Limited

*

Technico Pty Limited

*

Technico Technologies Inc.
(a 100% subsidiary of Technico Pty Limited)

*

Technico Agri Sciences Limited
(a 100% subsidiary of Technico Pty Limited)

*

Technico Asia Holdings Pty Limited
(a 100% subsidiary of Technico Pty Limited)

*

Technico Horticultural (Kunming) Co. Limited
(a 100% subsidiary of Technico Asia Holdings Pty Limited)

*

ITC Infotech Limited
(a 100% subsidiary of ITC Infotech India Limited)

*

ITC Infotech (USA), Inc.
(a 100% subsidiary of ITC Infotech India Limited)

*

Pyxis Solutions, LLC.
(a 100% subsidiary of ITC Infotech (USA), Inc.)

*

Wills Corporation Limited

@

Gold Flake Corporation Limited

@

King Maker Marketing, Inc.

@

WelcomHotels Lanka (Private) Limited

*

ITC Investments and Holdings Limited

@

North East Nutrients Private Limited

*

Report Profile, Scope
and Boundary
The following Jointly controlled entities (incorporated Joint Ventures) included in ITC’s
Consolidated Financial Statements are not included in the Sustainability Report 2015:
Names of Joint Ventures

Remarks

Maharaja Heritage Resorts Limited

#

Espirit Hotels Private Limited

#

Logix Developers Private Limited

#

ITC Essentra Limited (formerly known as ITC Filtrona Limited) (a joint
venture of Gold Flake Corporation Limited)

#

The following Group’s Associates included in ITC’s Consolidated Financial Statements are not
included in the Sustainability Report 2015:
Name

Remarks

Gujarat Hotels Limited

#

International Travel House Limited

#

Russell Investments Limited

@

Divya Management Limited

@

Antrang Finance Limited

@

Classic Infrastructure and Development Limited

#

* ITC is currently in the process of defining the system for inclusion of these entities in the Sustainability
Reporting boundary. Going forward, the performance of these entities against identified material aspects will
be reported in a progressive manner.
# These entities will be progressively included within the reporting boundary, as part of ITC’s supply chain,
based on identified material aspects.
@ These entities primarily invest in financial market instruments and do not have any material sustainability
impacts.

In order to obtain
an objective and
impartial assurance
on the Report, ITC
has been seeking
the same from third
party agencies on
all its Sustainability
Reports since it
started reporting in
2004

53

Governance
Structure

The Company’s Corporate Governance processes are designed to support effective
management of multiple businesses while retaining focus on each one of them. The practice
of Corporate Governance at ITC takes place at three interlinked levels.
Strategic supervision

by the Board of Directors (Board)

Strategic management

by the Corporate Management Committee (CMC)

Executive management

by the Divisional/Strategic Business Unit (SBU)
Chief Executive assisted by the respective
Divisional/SBU Management Committee

The role, powers and composition of the Board, Board Committees, CMC and Divisional/SBU
Management Committees are available on the Company’s corporate website.

BOARD OF DIRECTORS

CSR AND
SUSTAINABILITY
COMMITTEE

AUDIT
COMMITTEE

NOMINATION &
COMPENSATION
COMMITTEE

CORPORATE
MANAGEMENT
COMMITTEE

SECURITYHOLDERS
RELATIONSHIP
COMMITTEE

INDEPENDENT
DIRECTORS
COMMITTEE

DIVISIONAL/SBU MANAGEMENT
COMMITTEES

CORPORATE FUNCTIONS

Divisional/SBU Management Committees, each
headed by a Divisional/SBU Chief Executive

Planning & Treasury, Accounting, Taxation,
Risk Management, Legal, Secretarial, Internal
Audit, EHS, Human Resources, Corporate
Communications, Corporate Affairs, Research
& Development, Central Projects Organisation
and IT Support Services

Businesses include:
FMCG, Hotels, Paperboards, Specialty Papers
& Packaging, Agri Business and Information
Technology

Board of Directors
The ITC Board is a balanced Board comprising
Executive Directors and Non-Executive
Directors, including Independent Directors.

Selection of Directors
The Nomination & Compensation Committee
of the Board approved the criteria for
determining
qualifications,
positive
attributes and independence of Directors

Corporate Functions include:

as required under the Companies Act, 2013
and the Rules thereunder. The Governance
Policy of the Company also inter alia
requires that Non-Executive Directors,
including Independent Directors, be drawn
from amongst eminent professionals with
experience in business/finance/law/public
administration & enterprises. The Board
Diversity Policy of the Company requires the
Board to have balance of skills, experience
and diversity of perspectives appropriate to

55

Sustainable
Livelihoods
the Company. The Articles of Association of
the Company provide that the strength of the
Board shall not be fewer than five nor more
than eighteen.
Directors
are
appointed/re-appointed
with the approval of the Shareholders for
a period of three to five years or a shorter
duration, in accordance with retirement
guidelines as determined by the Board from
time to time. The initial appointment of
Executive Directors is normally for a period
of three years. All Directors, other than
Independent Directors, are liable to retire by

Director

rotation unless otherwise approved by the
Shareholders or provided under any statute.
The Independent Directors have confirmed
that they meet the criteria of ‘Independence’
as stipulated under the statute.

Composition of the Board
The strength of the Board as on 31st March,
2015, was sixteen, of which four were
Executive Directors and eight Independent
Directors. The composition of the Board,
including other Directorship/Committee
membership of Directors was as follows:

No. of other
Directorship(s)1

No. of Membership(s)
[including Chairmanship(s)]
of Board Committees of other
companies2

Executive Directors
Y. C. Deveshwar

1

Nil

N. Anand

8

Nil

Nil

Nil

2

Nil

P. V. Dhobale
K. N. Grant

Non-Executive Directors – Independent Directors
A. Baijal

5

2 [as Chairman]

Nil

Nil

A. Duggal

5

3 [including 1 as Chairman]

S. H. Khan

7

9 [including 4 as Chairman]

S. B. Mathur

12

5

P. B. Ramanujam

Nil

Nil

S. S. H. Rehman

Nil

Nil

1

Nil

A. V. Girija Kumar

Nil

Nil

R. E. Lerwill

Nil

Nil

S. B. Mainak

6

Nil

K. Vaidyanath

Nil

Nil

S. Banerjee

M. Shankar (Ms.)
Non-Executive Directors – Others

1. Excludes Directorship in Foreign Companies and Membership of Managing Committees of Chambers of
Commerce/Professional Bodies.
2. Denotes Membership/Chairmanship of Audit Committee and/or Stakeholders Relationship Committee of
Indian Public Limited Companies.

56

Governance
Structure

ITC’s Governance Policy requires the Board to
meet at least six times in a year. During the
year, seven meetings of the Board were held.

Board Committees
Currently, there are five Board Committees
– the CSR and Sustainability Committee,
the Audit Committee, the Nomination
&
Compensation
Committee,
the
Securityholders Relationship Committee and
the Independent Directors Committee.

CSR and Sustainability
Committee
The CSR and Sustainability Committee
presently comprises the Chairman of the
Company and four Non-Executive Directors,
one of whom is an Independent Director. The
Chairman of the Company is the Chairman of
the Committee.
The CSR and Sustainability Committee,
inter alia, reviews, monitors and provides
strategic direction to the Company’s CSR and
sustainability practices towards fulfilling its
Triple Bottom Line objectives. The Committee
seeks to guide the Company in integrating
its social and environmental objectives
with its business strategies and assists in
crafting unique models to support creation
of sustainable livelihoods. The Committee
formulates & monitors the CSR Policy and

recommends to the Board the annual CSR
Plan of the Company in terms of the statute.
The Committee also reviews the Business
Responsibility Report of the Company.
The CMC has constituted a Sustainability
Compliance Review Committee, which
presently comprises eight members - an
Executive Director, two CMC members and
five senior members of management. The
role of the Committee, inter alia, includes
monitoring and evaluating compliance with
the Sustainability Policies of the Company
and placing a quarterly report thereon for
review by the CMC.

Audit Committee
The Audit Committee presently comprises
five Non-Executive Directors, four of whom
are Independent Directors. The Chairman of
the Committee is an Independent Director.
The Executive Director representing the
Finance function, the Chief Financial
Officer, the Head of Internal Audit and the
representative of the Statutory Auditors are
Invitees to meetings of the Audit Committee.
The Head of Internal Audit, who reports to
the Audit Committee, is the Co-ordinator,
and the Company Secretary is the Secretary
to the Committee. The representatives of the
Cost Auditors are invited to meetings of the
Audit Committee whenever matters relating
to cost audit are considered.

The CSR and
Sustainability
Committee, inter
alia, reviews,
monitors and
provides strategic
direction to the
Company’s CSR
and sustainability
practices towards
fulfilling its Triple
Bottom Line
objectives

57

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Nomination & Compensation
Committee
The Nomination & Compensation Committee
presently comprises the Chairman of the
Company and five Non-Executive Directors,
four of whom are Independent Directors.
The Chairman of the Committee is an
Independent Director.

Securityholders Relationship
Committee
The Securityholders Relationship Committee
presently comprises four Directors. The
Chairman of the Committee is a NonExecutive Director.

ITC has a
diversified business
portfolio, which
demands that the
senior leadership
has an in-depth
knowledge and
understanding of
the functioning of
the Company, so
as to enhance the
value-generating
capacity of the
organisation
58

Independent Directors
Committee
The Independent Directors Committee
comprises all Independent Directors of the
Company.
Note: Further details of the Board
Committees are available in the ‘Report
on Corporate Governance’ section of ITC’s
Report & Accounts 2015.

Chair of the Highest
Governance Body
The Chairman is the Chief Executive of the
Company. He is the Chairman of the Board
and the CMC. His primary role is to provide

leadership to the Board and the CMC for
realising Company goals in accordance with
the charter approved by the Board.
ITC has a diversified business portfolio, which
demands that the senior leadership has an
in-depth knowledge and understanding of
the functioning of the Company, so as to
enhance the value-generating capacity of
the organisation and contribute significantly
to stakeholders’ aspirations and societal
expectations. The Chief Executive Officer of
the Company is therefore generally chosen
from amongst the executive management of
the Company. The current Chief Executive
Officer of the Company is also the Chairman
of the Board.

Avoidance of
Conflicts of
Interest
In terms of the ITC Code of Conduct, Directors,
senior management and employees must
avoid situations in which their personal
interests could conflict with the interests
of the Company. This is an area in which it
is impossible to provide comprehensive
guidance but the guiding principle is that
conflicts, if any, or potential conflicts, must
be disclosed to higher management for
guidance and action as appropriate.

Governance
Structure
The Directors and key executives are
required to disclose to the Board whether
they, directly or indirectly or on behalf of
third parties, have material interest in any
transaction or matter directly affecting the
Company. Senior management is required to
confirm on an annual basis that no material
transaction has been entered into by them
which could have potential conflict with
the interests of the Company at large; such
confirmations are placed before the Board.
All transactions of the Company with related
parties, or their subsequent modifications,
are required to be approved by the Audit
Committee. Further, transactions with
related parties which are not in the ordinary
course of business or not on arm’s length
basis would also require the approval of the
Board or Shareholders, as applicable.
The Company has a code of conduct for
prevention of insider trading in the securities
of the Company. The ITC Code of Conduct for
Prevention of Insider Trading - 2015, inter alia,
prohibits purchase or sale of securities of the
Company by Directors and employees while
in possession of unpublished price sensitive
information in relation to the Company.

Performance
of the Highest
Governance Body
ITC believes that a Board, which is well
informed/familiarised with the Company,
can contribute significantly to effectively
discharge its role of trusteeship in a manner
that fulfils stakeholders’ aspirations and
societal expectations. In pursuit of this, the
Directors are updated on a continuing basis
on changes/developments in the domestic/
global corporate and industry scenario
including those pertaining to statutes/
legislations and economic environment,
to enable them to take well informed and
timely decisions. The Directors are also kept
abreast on all business related matters, risk
assessment & minimisation procedures, and
new initiatives proposed by the Company.
The Nomination & Compensation Committee
has approved the Policy on Board evaluation,
evaluation of Board Committees’ functioning

and individual Director evaluation. In
keeping with ITC’s belief that it is the
collective effectiveness of the Board that
impacts Company performance, the primary
evaluation platform is that of collective
performance of the Board as a whole. Board
performance is assessed against the roles and
responsibilities of the Board as provided in the
statute read with the Company’s Governance
Policy. The parameters for Board performance
evaluation have been derived from the Board’s
core role of trusteeship to protect and enhance
shareholder value as well as fulfil expectations
of other stakeholders through strategic
supervision of the Company. Evaluation of
functioning of Board Committees is based on
discussions amongst Committee members
and shared by each Committee Chairman with
the Board. Individual Directors are evaluated in
the context of the role played by each Director
as a member of the Board at its meetings,
in assisting the Board in realising its role of
strategic supervision of the functioning of the
Company in pursuit of its purpose and goals.

The parameters for
Board performance
evaluation have
been derived from
the Board’s core
role of trusteeship
to protect
and enhance
shareholder value
as well as fulfil
expectations of
other stakeholders
through strategic
supervision of the
Company

The Board determines the remuneration of
the Chairman and other Executive Directors,
on the recommendation of the Nomination &
Compensation Committee; remuneration of
the Directors is subject to the approval of the
shareholders. Such remuneration is linked
to the performance of the Company in as
much as the performance bonus of Executive
Directors is based on various qualitative
and quantitative performance criteria.
Such criteria also includes the Company’s
contribution with respect to sustainable
development of the society/nation & social
investments and sensitivity to environment.
Remuneration to Non-Executive Directors
is by way of commission for each financial
year; such commission is determined by
the Board within the limit approved by the
shareholders. Their remuneration is based,
inter alia, on Company performance and
regulatory provisions and is payable on a
uniform basis to reinforce the principle of
collective responsibility. Non-Executive
Directors are also entitled to sitting fees
for attending meetings of the Board and
Committees thereof, the quantum of which is
determined by the Board.

59

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Remuneration and
Incentives
ITC’s remuneration strategy is marketled, leverages performance and takes into
account the Company’s capacity to pay. The
remuneration package is competitive and is
designed to attract and retain quality talent.
The ratio of remuneration of the highest
paid employee to the median remuneration
for the year 2014-15 was 439:1. The ratio
of the annual increase (percentage) in Total
Compensation of the highest paid employee
to the median annual increase (percentage)
in Total Compensation of all employees
(excluding the highest paid employee) was
23:14 in FY 2014-15.
Remuneration includes salary, performance
bonus, allowances & other benefits/
applicable perquisites except contribution
to the approved Group Pension under the
defined benefit scheme and Gratuity Funds
and provisions for leave encashment which
are actuarially determined on an overall
Company basis. The term ‘remuneration’
has the meaning assigned to it under the
Companies Act, 2013. Stock Options have
been granted to the Directors and Employees
under the Employee Stock Option Schemes
of the Company at ‘market price’ [within the
meaning of the erstwhile SEBI (Employee
Stock Option Scheme and Employee Stock

ITC’s Code of
Conduct is
anchored in three
core principles –
good corporate
governance,
good corporate
citizenship and
exemplary personal
conduct in relation
to the Company’s
business and
reputation
60

Purchase Scheme) Guidelines, 1999]. The
Company has not incurred any expenditure
for this purpose which can be ascribed to any
Director or Employee.

Ethics and Integrity
ITC believes that every employee is a trustee
of its stakeholders and must strictly adhere
to a Code of Conduct and conduct himself/
herself at all times in a professional and
ethical manner. Integrity is a core value
and forms the basis of the Company’s
organisation culture.
ITC’s Code of Conduct, has been in place
since 1996. The Code is anchored in three
core principles – good corporate governance,
good corporate citizenship and exemplary
personal conduct in relation to the Company’s
business and reputation. The Code clearly
spells out guidelines for employees on dealing
with people in the organisation, ensuring a
gender friendly workplace, relationships with
suppliers and customers, legal compliance,
health & safety, avoidance of conflict of
interest, transparency and auditability in
all their actions, protection of confidential
information, leading by example etc.
The ITC Code of Conduct is displayed on the
Company’s corporate website and is shared
with employees at the time of their induction
into the Company. A system has also been
put in place to get employees to read and

Governance
Structure
and prioritisation of strategic and
operational
risks,
development
of
appropriate mitigation strategies and
conducts periodic reviews of the progress
on the management of identified risks.

sign-off ITC’s Sustainability Policies and the
ITC Code of Conduct. Any violation of the ITC
Code of Conduct by an employee renders
him/her liable for disciplinary action.
ITC’s Code of Conduct specifically states that
in the context of possible or potential areas
of conflict of interest, such incidents must be
disclosed immediately to higher management
for guidance and action as appropriate.

	A combination of centrally issued policies
and divisionally-evolved procedures brings
robustness to the process of ensuring that
business risks are effectively addressed.

l

	Appropriate structures are in place to
proactively monitor and manage the
inherent risks in businesses with unique/
relatively high risk profiles.

A Whistleblower Policy is in place and has
been displayed on the Company’s corporate
website and has also been appropriately
communicated to all employees.

l

Risk Management

l

As a diversified enterprise, ITC continues to
focus on a system-based approach to business
risk management. The management of risk
is embedded in the corporate strategies
of developing a portfolio of world-class
businesses that best match organisational
capability with market opportunities,
focusing on building distributed leadership
and succession planning processes, nurturing
specialism and enhancing organisational
capabilities through timely developmental
inputs. Accordingly, management of risk
has always been an integral part of the
Company’s ‘Strategy of Organisation’ and
straddles its planning, execution and
reporting processes and systems. Backed by
strong internal control systems, the current
Risk Management Framework consists of the
following key elements:
	 The Corporate Governance Policy approved
by the Board, clearly lays down the roles
and responsibilities of the various entities
in relation to risk management covering a
range of responsibilities, from the strategic
to the operational. These role definitions,
inter alia, provide the foundation for the
Company’s Risk Management Policy and
Framework that is endorsed by the Board
and is aimed at ensuring formulation of
appropriate risk management procedures,
their effective implementation across ITC
and independent monitoring and reporting
by Internal Audit.

l

	The Corporate Risk Management Cell,
through focused interactions with
businesses, facilitates the identification

	A strong and independent Internal Audit
function at the Corporate level carries out
risk focused audits across all businesses,
enabling identification of areas where risk
management processes may need to be
strengthened. The Audit Committee of the
Board reviews Internal Audit findings, and
provides strategic guidance on internal
controls. The Audit Compliance Review
Committee closely monitors the internal
control environment within the Company
including implementation of the action plans
emerging out of internal audit findings.

The management
of risk is embedded
in the corporate
strategies of
developing a
portfolio of worldclass businesses
that best match
organisational
capability
with market
opportunities

	At the Business level, Divisional Auditors
continuously verify compliance with laid
down policies and procedures, and help
plug control gaps by assisting operating
management in the formulation of control
procedures for new areas of operation.

l

	A robust and comprehensive framework
of strategic planning and performance
management ensures realisation of
business objectives based on effective
strategy implementation. The annual
planning exercise requires all businesses
to clearly identify their top risks and set out
a mitigation plan with agreed timelines and
accountability. Businesses are required to
confirm periodically that all relevant risks
have been identified, assessed, evaluated
and that appropriate mitigation systems
have been implemented.

l

The combination of policies and processes
as outlined above adequately addresses the
various risks associated with the Company’s
businesses.

l

The Company also constituted a Risk
Management Committee during the year.

61

Economic
Performance

Management
Approach

Economic
Performance

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Disclosure of
Management
Approach (DMA):
ITC’s Vision to subserve national priorities and
create enduring societal value has led to the
adoption of multi-dimensional sustainability
initiatives that deliver superior ‘Triple Bottom
Line’ performance and generates large scale
economic, environmental and social capital.
This Vision is premised on the belief that the
transformational capacity of business can
be effectively leveraged to create significant
societal value through a spirit of innovation
and enterprise. The Company’s ‘Triple Bottom
Line’ contribution is manifest in the crafting
of innovative models that not only generate
new sources of competitive advantage
for its businesses, but also leads to the
augmentation of natural capital and creation
of sustainable livelihoods.

enhance the wealth generating capability of
the enterprise in a globalising environment
delivering
superior
and
sustainable
stakeholder value’.
The Company’s strategy is to ensure that
each of its businesses is world-class and
internationally competitive in the Indian
global market in the first instance and
progressively in global markets.

Goals and
Performance
At the enterprise level, the Company’s goals
include 	 Sustaining ITC’s position as one of India’s
most valuable corporations.

l

	 Achieving leadership in each of the
business segments within a reasonable
time frame.

l

	 Achieving a Return on Capital Employed
(ROCE) in excess of the Company’s cost of
capital, at all times.

l

This ‘Triple Bottom Line’ approach to
creating larger ‘stakeholder value’, as
opposed to merely ensuring uni-dimensional
‘shareholder value’ is the driving force
that defines the Company’s sustainability
vision and its growth path into the future.
ITC’s commitment in the area of economic
performance is encapsulated in its vision
statement, which is to ‘Sustain ITC’s position
as one of India’s most valuable corporations
through world-class performance, creating
growing value for the Indian economy and the
Company’s stakeholders’. ITC’s Mission is ‘to

64

Please refer to the ‘Report of the
Directors and Management Discussion
and Analysis’ section of the Report
and Accounts 2015 (available on www.
itcportal.com) for a detailed discussion
on the Company’s market standing in each
of the business segments, as well as the
business environment, opportunities, key
challenges, etc. pertaining to each of the
Company’s businesses.

Economic
Performance

Economic
Performance
The Company delivered another year of
steady performance in the backdrop of
continuing sluggishness in the macroeconomic environment, exacerbated by a
steep increase in taxes/duties on cigarettes,
which led to unprecedented pressure on
legal cigarette industry sales volumes. ITC
also had to contend with start-up costs
relating to the launch of new products
and categories in the non-cigarette
FMCG segment, input cost pressures
in the Paperboards, Paper & Packaging
Businesses and a weak demand and pricing
environment in the Hotels Business.
Gross Revenue for the year grew by 7.0%
to `49,964.82 crores. Net Revenue at
`36,083.21 crores grew by 9.7% primarily
driven by a 11.3% growth in the noncigarette FMCG segment, 8.1% growth in
the Agri Business segment and 8.7% growth
in the Cigarettes segment. Profit Before Tax
registered a growth of 10.6% to `13,997.52
crores while Net Profit at `9,607.73 crores
increased by 9.4%. After adjusting for
liability written back in Q2 FY14 (towards
Rates and Taxes and Interest thereon
pertaining to earlier years, aggregating
`192.68 crores) underlying growth in Profit
Before Tax and Net Profit for the year
grew by 12.3% and 11.0%, respectively.
Earnings Per Share for the year stood at
`12.05 (previous year `11.09). Cash flows
from Operations aggregated `13,534.65

crores compared to `10,759.50 crores in the
previous year.
ITC, as a premier ‘Indian’ enterprise,
consciously exercises the strategic
choice of contributing to and securing
the competitiveness of the entire value
chain, of which it is a part. This philosophy
has shaped the Company’s approach to
business into ‘a commitment beyond the
market’. With its diversification initiatives
over the past few years, the Company is well
positioned to establish itself as the ‘most
trusted provider of food products in the
Indian market’ leveraging a strong portfolio
of world-class brands, deep understanding
of the diverse tastes and preferences of
Indian consumers, focus on best-in-class
quality and operational excellence across
the value chain.
Continuing with its chosen strategy of
creating multiple drivers of growth, the
Company is presently the leading FMCG
marketer in India, the ‘greenest luxury hotel
chain’ in the world, the clear market leader
in the Indian Paperboard and Packaging
industry and leading exporter of quality Agri
products. ITC’s wholly owned subsidiary, ITC
Infotech India Limited, is poised to achieve
its strategic and financial objectives by
leveraging its leadership in the knowledgecentric Information Technology services
and its increasing global presence.
For the year ended 31st March, 2015, ITC
declared a Dividend of `6.25 per share
(previous year `6.00 per share).

65

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Direct Economic Impact
` Crores

Key Economic
Indicators*

2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15

Gross Revenue

30,528

34,872

41,810

46,713

49,965

13%

Net Revenue

21,168

24,798

29,606

32,883

36,083

14%

Exports

2,464

2,315

3,474

4,046

4,511

16%

Contribution to
Government/Exchequer

15,860

18,006

22,343

25,669

26,912

14%

Cost of Bought out Goods
and Services

12,374

14,255

17,031

18,391

19,764

12%

Employee Benefits
Expense

1,140

1,258

1,387

1,608

1,780

12%

Payments to Providers of
Capital

4,498

5,669

6,800

7,977

8,645

18%

- Interest and Dividend

3,512

3,596

4,235

4,775

5,067

986

2,073

2,565

3,202

3,578

- Retained Profits

* Detailed Financial Performance available at www.itcportal.com

66

CAGR

Economic
Performance

Revenue and Profit Before Depreciation Interest
and Tax (PBDIT)
` Crores

Year

2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15

CAGR

Gross Revenue

30,528

34,872

41,810

46,713

49,965

13%

PBDIT

7,993

9,674

11,566

13,562

15,017

17%

Total Assets and Returns
Despite the extremely challenging business
environment during the year under
review, ITC continued to make significant
investments in the Indian economy across
its business domains, even as it has been
successful in generating progressively

higher returns on the assets deployed.
Hence, while the Balance Sheet size of the
Company has expanded at a compound rate
of 15% over the previous five years to reach
`44,195.66 Crores as at 31st March, 2015,
returns on assets deployed have increased
from about 29% to about 32% during the
same period.

Return on Total Assets

32

32

32

48000
41000

31

34000
29

2011

27000

2012

Total Assets (RHS)

2013

2014

Return on Total Assets (LHS)

2015

20000

` Crores

33
32
32
31
31
% 30
30
29
29
28
28

ITC consciously
exercises the
strategic choice
of contributing to
and securing the
competitiveness
of the entire
value chain, of
which it is a part.
This philosophy
has shaped
the Company’s
approach to
business into
‘a commitment
beyond the market’
67

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Market Capitalisation &
Earnings Per Share
ITC is one of India’s most admired and
valuable corporations and has consistently
featured over the last nineteen years,
amongst the top 10 private sector companies
in terms of market capitalisation and profits.
It is amongst the most influential stocks in
the Indian equity market.
1996
Market Capitalisation (` Crores )*

5,571

Adjusted EPS (`)**

0.35

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

1,00,476 1,40,408 1,77,360 2,44,245 2,80,708 2,60,864
5.31

6.45

7.88

9.39

11.05

11.99

CAGR
22%
20%

*Market Capitalisation based on year-end closing prices quoted on the Bombay Stock Exchange.
**EPS adjusted for impact of Corporate Actions to facilitate like to like comparison.

Analysis of Value Added
Distribution of Value Added

35000
30000

` Crores

25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
2011

2012

Exchequer

2013

Employees

Contribution to
the National Exchequer
The Company’s contribution accounts for
about 7.48% of the total excise revenue
of the Government of India. In the area of
income tax, the Company is the highest tax
payer in eastern India and among the top tax
payers nationally.

2014

2015

Providers of Capital

Contribution to Exchequer

` Crores

0

29500
26912
25669
26000
22343
22500
19000
18006
15500 15860
12000
8500
5000
1500
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Contribution to Exchequer

68

Economic
Performance

Dividend Payout
For the current year, the Company has declared a dividend of `6.25 per share of `1/- each.

` Crores

Dividend Paid (incl. Dividend Distribution Tax)

6500
6000
5500
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000

6030
5583
4853
1484

4089

2518
2011

2012

Ordinary Dividend

2013

2014

The Company’s
strategy is to
ensure that each
of its businesses
is world-class and
internationally
competitive in
the Indian global
market in the
first instance and
progressively in
global markets

2015

2011-Special Dividend on 100th AGM

Locally Based Suppliers
The Company’s suppliers, both local and
international, constitute one of its important
stakeholder groups. Supplier engagements
are founded on a positive procurement culture
supported by policies, processes and best
practices to ensure that procurement activity
is conducted in an open, transparent and
non-discriminatory manner. Strong processes
are in place to identify/develop and qualify
vendors on the basis of supply assurance,
innovation quotient, product quality and
value for money considerations. Formal
competitive processes are established and
documented discussions, recommendations
and decisions underlay procurement activity.

All businesses of the Company have modern
facilities and use state-of-the-art technologies
to ensure benchmarked quality and value.
Accordingly, the Company sources specialised
production
machinery
from
reputed
international and Indian manufacturers –
across large, medium and small scale sectors.
Utility machinery such as boilers, generator
sets, air-conditioning and refrigeration
machinery and electrical & electronic systems
are sourced largely from Indian or India-based
suppliers. Competent Indian contractors
carry out construction and renovation of new
manufacturing facilities, hotels, warehouses
& offices. About 85.8% of raw materials and
stores & spares have been locally procured
during the year.

Raw Materials, Stores & Spares Consumed

12000

` Crores

10000
8000

9630

9165
6000
4000

8018
6184

6826

2000
0

1001
2011
Imported

1067
2012

1138
2013

1335
2014

1589
2015

Indigenous

69

Sustainable
Livelihoods

The
Company
actively
encourages
competency development among local
vendors and its vendor base includes
numerous medium and small scale
enterprises that are proximate to its
manufacturing
locations.
Wherever
appropriate, vendors are provided technical
support and managerial inputs to enable
them to move in tandem with the Company’s
business plans. The Company also supports
several vocational training initiatives in areas
in the vicinity of its operations. These have
been effective in empowering youth with
requisite skills and increased opportunities
for entrepreneurial development. Further,
the Company has continued to set up
sourcing centres in rural India for several

of its product categories, both directly and
in collaboration with various State agencies
and NGOs to assist in the creation of
sustainable livelihoods.

Financial Assistance from
Government
The Company had availed the incentives
offered by the States of Andhra Pradesh
and Tamil Nadu, by way of deferment of
Sales Tax, which are repayable over a
period ranging from 10 to 14 years. The
outstanding amount of such assistance in
the form of Deferred Sales Tax due to be
repaid by the Paperboards and Specialty
Papers Division (PSPD) is given below:

Deferred Sales Tax

100

91

86

90

78

80

66

The Company
actively encourages
competency
development
among local
vendors and
its vendor base
includes numerous
medium and small
scale enterprises

70

` Crores

70
60

51

50
40
30
20
10
0
2010-11

2011-12

Deferred Sales Tax

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

Economic
Performance

Engaging Talent, Local Hiring
and Senior Management
It is the Company’s Human Resource (HR)
philosophy that while dealing with each
other, the management and employees
shall uphold the values of trust, teamwork,
mutuality and collaboration, meritocracy,
objectivity,
self-respect
and
human
dignity. ITC’s HR management systems and
processes are relentlessly customer-focused,
competition-differentiated,
performancedriven and future-capable. The Company’s
HR Development strategy seeks to fulfil
this mandate through careful selection and
rigorous implementation of a wide range of
programmes and interventions.
ITC believes that its competitive capability
to build future-ready businesses and
create enduring value for stakeholders is
enriched by a dedicated and high-quality
human resource pool. Therefore, nurturing
quality talent and caring for the well-being
of employees form an integral part of ITC’s
work culture, which focuses on creating
a conducive work environment that helps
deliver winning performance.

` Crores

The Company’s policy on “Diversity and Equal
Opportunity” is premised on its fundamental
belief that diversity at the workplace creates
an environment conducive to engagement,
alignment, innovation and high performance.
The Policy provides for diversity and equal
opportunities to all employees across the
Company, based on merit and ability. The
policy also ensures a work environment
that is free from any form of discrimination
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0

902
117
121
2011

amongst its employees in compensation,
training and employee benefits, based on
caste, religion, disability, gender, sexual
orientation, race, colour, ancestry, marital
status or affiliation with a political, religious
or union organisation or majority/minority
group. A necessary structure for dealing with
requirements like sexual harassment has
been put in place.
The Company’s talent management strategy
is focused on building a future-ready talent
bank in the organisation to ensure a pipeline
of high-quality managerial talent, specialists
and business leaders. ITC’s talent engagement
approach focuses on attracting and nurturing
quality talent, supported by significant
investments in learning and development.
In 2014-15, the minimum wage paid to entry
level workers of the Company was equal
to or more than the statutory minimum
wage applicable at all locations of ITC’s
operations. The employees are also entitled
to retirement benefit schemes which
include employee pension, provident fund
and gratuity. All statutory payments, as
applicable, e.g., Provident Fund and Family
Pension contributions, are deposited with the
Government in a timely manner.
The pension plans and other applicable
employee benefits obligations are determined
and funded in accordance with independent
actuarial valuation. The assets of these trust
funds are managed in accordance with the
prescribed statutory pattern. The assets
of the trust funds are well diversified and
investments are made with the objective of

1024

1112

1331

128
106

148
127

162
115

2012

Contribution to Provident
& Other Funds

2013

2014

Workmen & Staff Welfare

1505

167
108
2015
Salaries & Wages

The Company’s
talent management
strategy is focused
on building a
future-ready
talent bank in the
organisation to
ensure a pipeline
of high-quality
managerial talent,
specialists and
business leaders

71

Sustainable
Livelihoods
Contribution to Provident & Other Funds

200
180

121
127

160

115

` Crores

140

108

120
100

106
77

80
51

60

53
35

20

40
20
0
2011

2012

Contribution to Pension Funds
protecting capital and optimising returns
within acceptable risk parameters. The funds
are consistently sustained to meet requisite
superannuation commitments.

Corporate Social Responsibility
ITC’s overarching aspiration to create significant
and sustainable societal value, inspired by a
vision to subserve a larger national purpose
and abide by the strong value of trusteeship, is
manifest in ITC’s CSR initiatives that embrace
the most disadvantaged sections of society,
especially in rural India, through economic
empowerment based on grassroots capacity
building. Towards this end, the Company
adopted a comprehensive CSR policy in 201415 conceived to address the major development
challenges being faced by the Nation.

ITC’s CSR initiatives
embrace the most
disadvantaged
sections of
society, especially
in rural India,
through economic
empowerment
based on
grassroots capacity
building

72

In the social sector, the two most important
stakeholders for the Company are (a) rural
communities in the Company’s agri-business
areas who look at ITC to find viable solutions
to some of the major challenges that could
threaten the sustainability of their production
systems and (b) communities residing in close
proximity of the Company’s production units,
situated in urban and semi-rural locations, who
expect help in the creation of the necessary
socio-economic infrastructure for the
development of a healthy, educated and skilled
work force with the capability to successfully
compete for modern jobs.

2013

2014

2015

Contribution to Provident & Other Funds
It is in pursuance of these goals that the
Company has drafted its policy on Corporate
Social Responsibility (ITC’s CSR Policy
detailed in the Policies & Guidelines section
of this Report and in the section on Report of
the Directors & Management Discussion and
Analysis in the Annual Report and Accounts
2015). Given ITC’s operational spread, its
stakeholder representation cuts across rural
and urban milieus. Interventions therefore
are appropriately designed to respond to
their unique multi-dimensional development
challenges in order to accomplish the goal
of empowering stakeholder communities

Economic
Performance

(i)	

Areas listed under Schedule – VII
to the Companies Act, 2013

ITC’s interventions
(including through
Trusts established by the
Company)

Eradicating hunger, poverty and malnutrition,
promoting health care including preventive health care
and sanitation including contribution to the Swachh
Bharat Kosh setup by the Central Government for the
promotion of sanitation and making available safe
drinking water.

Health & sanitation,
drinking water,
contribution to Swachh
Bharat Kosh

(ii)	 Promoting education, including special education and
employment enhancing vocation skills specially among
children, women, elderly, and the differently abled and
livelihood enhancement projects.

Education, vocational
training, livestock
development and
livelihoods generation

(iii)	 Promoting gender equality, empowering women,
setting up homes and hostels for women and orphans;
setting up old age homes, day care centres and such
other facilities for senior citizens and measures
for reducing inequalities faced by socially and
economically backward groups.

Women empowerment

(iv)	 Ensuring environmental sustainability, ecological
balance, protection of flora and fauna, animal welfare,
agroforestry, conservation of natural resources and
maintaining quality of soil, air and water including
contribution to the Clean Ganga Fund setup by the
Central Government for rejuvenation of river Ganga.

Environmental
sustainability soil &
moisture conservation
and wasteland
development

(v)	

Protection of national heritage, art and culture,
including restoration of buildings and sites of historical
importance and works of art, setting up public libraries,
promotion and development of traditional arts and
handicrafts.

Protection of national
heritage, art and culture

(vi)	 Training to promote rural sports, nationally recognised
sports, paralympic sports and Olympic sports.

Sports

(vii)	 Contribution to the Prime Minister's National
Relief Fund or any other fund set up by the Central
Government for socio-economic development and relief
and welfare of the schedule castes, the scheduled
tribes, other backward classes, minorities and women.

Contribution to the
Prime Minister's National
Relief Fund

(viii)	 Rural Development projects.

Agri development

to promote sustainable livelihoods. Various
CSR activities in which the Company has
been engaged during the current year are
listed above.
The expenditure incurred under Section 135
of the Companies Act, 2013 applicable for
the first time in 2014-15 on CSR activities
amounted to `214.06 Crores comprising
employee benefits expense of `7.61 Crores

and other expenses of `206.45 Crores of
which `12.67 Crores is accrued for payment
as on 31st March 2015. Such CSR expenditure
of `214.06 Crores excludes `4.97 Crores
being the excess of expenditure of salaries of
CSR personnel and administrative expenses
over the limit imposed of 5% of total CSR
expenditure laid down under Rule 4(6) of the
Companies (Corporate Social Responsibility
Policy) Rules, 2014 for such expenses.

73

Environmental
Performance

Management
Approach
Energy
Air Emissions
Water Management
Recycling and Waste
Management
Raw Materials
Biodiversity

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Management
Approach

According to the World Economic Forum (WEF)
Report on Global Risks 2015, the evolving risk
landscape indicates a shift over the past few
years from economic risks to environmental
risks – ranging from climate change to water
crises. The challenges related to environment
and ecosystems especially due to climate
change are complex, long-term and interrelated, especially in terms of its impact
on water and availability of other natural
resources. This in turn has wide-ranging
implications on ITC and its stakeholders.

ITC strives to
maximise the
efficiencies of
natural resource
usage across its
Businesses

76

In order to address these challenges,
environmental best practices have been
deeply integrated into ITC’s operations on
the basis of which, the Company strives to
maximise the efficiencies of natural resource
usage across its Businesses. Furthermore, for
continuous improvement on environmental

performance, during 2014-15 ITC’s Businesses
have set voluntary targets in terms of
specific energy reduction, specific water
intake reduction, specific waste generation,
etc. Accordingly targets have been set at
the Business/Unit levels for maintaining
this performance. An organisation-wide
integrated sustainability data management
system supplemented by standard operating
procedures for measurement and recording
provides the platform to monitor the data of
each business on resource utilisation and
environmental impact vis-à-vis production.
In addition, ITC also constantly endeavours
to create a positive environmental footprint.
Large-scale Social and Farm Forestry,
Integrated
Watershed
Development,
Sustainable Agriculture Practices and
logistic network optimisation of ITC’s FMCG

Environmental
Performance
products, among others, are a few examples
of extensive initiatives in this direction.
ITC’s Board approved Policies such as those
on Environment, Health and Safety, Life
Cycle Sustainability of Products and Services
and Responsible Sourcing, provide the
necessary framework to address the direct
impacts of the Company’s own operations as
well as progressively extend the efforts along
the supply chain (Please refer to Policies
available at www.itcportal.com). During
the reporting period, each Business drew a
roadmap for implementation of each of these
policies in a phased manner.
It is the overall responsibility of the
Divisional/Strategic Business Unit (SBU)
Chief Executives, to ensure implementation
of relevant policies and standards on
environmental performance through the
members of the respective Management
Committees, General Managers and Unit
Heads. This also includes institution of
various committees and designating specific
responsibilities.

by each Business is regularly reviewed by the
Sustainability Compliance Review Committee
(SCRC) of the Corporate Management
Committee (CMC).
The following sections outline the challenges
being faced by ITC on material environmental
aspects within as well as outside the
boundary of its operations, the strategy for
addressing each of these challenges and
performance for 2014-15.

ITC’s Board
approved Policies
such as those
on Environment,
Health and
Safety, Life Cycle
Sustainability
of Products and
Services and
Responsible
Sourcing, provide
the necessary
framework to
address the direct
impacts of the
Company’s own
operations as well
as progressively
extend the efforts
along the supply
chain

ITC’s Corporate Environment, Health &
Safety (CEHS) Department is responsible for
reviewing and updating Corporate Standards,
verifying compliance, providing guidance
and support as required. Compliance and
progress based upon the roadmap defined

77

Energy

Management
Approach
Continued economic progress and business
sustainability are today challenged by natural
resource depletion with its consequent
impacts on long term energy security. Energy
availability, accessibility and price volatility
are expected to be amongst the biggest
developmental challenges for India, where

around 600 million1 people lack reliable
access to electricity. Extreme energy price
volatility has been identified as a significant
global risk in the World Economic Forum
(WEF) Report on Global Risks 2015, which
will exert even more pressure on developing
economies like India. ITC has mapped its
challenges on the basis of existing as well
as the evolving energy scenario and has
strategised its response as follows:

1

Source: http://planningcommission.nic.in/sectors/index.php?sectors=energy

ITC’s
Sustainability
Policies
Addressing these
Challenges

Challenges
in Energy
Security

	 Volatility in energy prices.

ITC
Strategy

	 Adopting a low carbon growth path:

l

l

	 Existing regulatory requirements such as the
Perform, Achieve, Trade (PAT) and Renewable
Energy Certificate (REC) scheme.

è	

l

	 Energy
conservation
through
audits,
benchmarking and target setting for progressively
reducing specific energy consumption (energy
per unit of product/service).

l

	Future regulatory pressures–carbon tax or
additional requirements under PAT and REC.

l

	
Investment risks involved in offsite
renewable energy investments - weak
infrastructure linkages, restrictions on
inter-state wheeling/banking of electricity,
open access etc.

l

	 Increasing competition for biomass.

l

	Viable alternatives for fossil fuel to meet
thermal process energy requirements.

l

	 Addressing energy issues across the value
chain of products and services which are
beyond operational control.

l

Within Boundary

Goal set for 50% renewable energy share
by 2020.

Policy on
Environment,
Health and
Safety
Policy on
Life-cycle
Sustainability
Policy on
Responsible
Sourcing

	Investment in renewable energy assets
based on techno-commercial feasibility.

l

	Continuous monitoring and review of
performance through an organisationwide data management system.

l

	Life-cycle assessment based approach
embedded in the design and development
of products and services:

l

è	

Accounting of energy footprint along
the value chain and identification of
opportunities for improvement.

è	

Engagement with supply chain members
for monitoring and improvement of
energy performance.

è	

Progressive inclusion of energy performance
of supply chain partners within the
sustainability reporting boundary.

è	

Reduction of energy consumption in
transportation of raw materials, finished
goods and wastes.

Beyond Boundary

79

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Reporting ITC’s
Performance
Energy Consumption within
the Organisation
In 2014-15, ITC Units consumed 21,777 Terra
Joules (TJ) of energy, which shows a marginal
increase of around 2% in the total energy
consumption as compared to the previous
year (21,433 TJ in 2013-14).
The increase in total energy consumption
can be attributed primarily to the inclusion
of the following Units/activities into the
reporting boundary – Snacks and Noodles
Unit of Foods Business at Malur (Karnataka),
clonal plantation development activities of
Paperboards and Specialty Papers Business
at Bhadrachalam, ITC Grand Bharat in
Gurgaon and My Fortune Bengaluru of the
Hotels Business, together with units of
subsidiary companies, namely Classic Golf
Resort in Gurgaon, ITC Kakatiya in Hyderabad
and Fortune Resort Bay Island in Andaman
and Nicobar Islands.

The marginal increase in total energy
consumption despite reporting boundary
expansion has been achieved through better
capacity utilisation and concerted efforts on
energy conservation implemented across
several ITC Units.
Sources of 21,777 TJ of Energy in ITC
in 2014-15

3.0%

43.1%

53.9%

Energy purchased from state utilities
Energy from Renewable Sources
Energy directly from Fossil Fuels

Energy Consumption within ITC across Businesses

43.1% of the
total energy
consumption of
ITC was met from
renewable sources

80

Businesses

Energy
Consumption in TJ

% of ITC’s Total
Energy Consumption

% Renewable
Energy Share

Paperboards
and Specialty
Papers

19,503.95

89.6

44.9

Hotels

642.11

2.9

34.8

Leaf Tobacco

414.55

1.9

11.1

Foods

419.56

1.9

Cigarettes

362.69

1.7

Packaging and
Printing

277.52

1.3

31.4

Personal Care
Products

50.23

0.2

0.2

Others*

106.11

0.5

39.4

Target
for 2014-15
was 26%

33.2

*Others include Agri Business, Lifestyle Retailing Business Unit in Manesar, Classic Golf Resort – a subsidiary
unit in Gurgaon, ITC Infotech, ITC Life Sciences & Technology Centre and large offices.

Environmental
Performance

Energy Portfolio of ITC
Break-up of Direct Energy by Fossil Fuel
Types*

Break-up of Renewable Energy by Sources*

1.7%

7.7%

90.6%

Solid fuel

Liquid fuel

0.2%

5.0%

94.8%

Gaseous fuel

Biomass

*Figures are rounded off

Wind

Solar

*Figures are rounded off

Renewable Energy Utilisation in ITC*

38.5

Energy in TJ

8000
6000

30.6
26.3

24.1

3437

3571

4000
2000

5909

30.9

7957

8133

41.2
8802

38.1
8175

43.1
9392

50
40
30

6622

20
10

0

Percentage

35.3

10000

0
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15

Total Renewable
Energy (TJ)

Percentage of
Total Energy

Increase in renewable energy utilisation in
2014-15 from 2013-14 is predominantly due
to two factors:
	
Increase in direct renewable energy
consumption by ITC from 8,175 TJ in 201314 to 9,232 TJ in 2014-15, primary reasons
of which were:

l

è

	The Paperboards Unit at Bhadrachalam
utilised increased quantity of domestic
wood, and in turn produced more virgin
pulp leading to reduced dependence on
imported pulp. This in turn enhanced
availability and utilisation of black liquor
for steam generation and consequentially
led to lesser coal consumption.

è

*Figures are rounded off

	Higher consumption of chip/saw dust
and de-oiled bran at the Paperboards
Unit in Kovai.

	 Addition of 160 TJ from indirect sources of
renewable energy in the form of:

l

è

	Purchased steam generated from biomass
in Pune Unit of Foods Business and
Bengaluru Unit of Cigarettes Business,

è

	
Purchased electricity generated from
biomass in ITC Kakatiya, a subsidiary
unit and

è

	Purchased solar electricity in Guntur
office of Leaf Threshing Business.

The marginal
increase in
total energy
consumption
despite reporting
boundary
expansion has
been achieved
through better
capacity utilisation
and concerted
efforts on energy
conservation
implemented
across several ITC
Units

81

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Energy Savings within ITC
Substantial improvements in specific energy
performance were achieved at many of
the Units by a focused approach on energy
conservation through rigorous third party
audits and implementation of the viable
recommendations, coupled with better capacity
utilisation. As a result of implementation of
energy conservation measures, a total saving
of 145 TJ in energy consumption has been
achieved in 2014-15.
Total
Energy
Savings of
145 TJ

Direct Energy Savings
of 131.7 TJ
Indirect Energy
Savings of 13.3 TJ

The LEED® Platinum rating accorded to
all of ITC’s luxury hotels (certification is in
progress for the super premium ITC Grand
Bharat which was opened recently), making
it the greenest luxury hotel chain in the
world, implies a significant reduction in
specific energy consumption with respect to

Paperboards
and Specialty
Papers Business

Specific Energy
Consumption
Actual
for
2013-14

Target
Actual
for
for
2014-15 2014-15

conventionally designed hotels. ITC hotels
are not only energy efficient by design but
also conserve fossil fuels – with several of
ITC’s hotels sourcing more than 50% of their
electrical energy requirements from wind
farms. In order to continually reduce ITC’s
environmental footprint, green features are
integrated in all new constructions and are
also being incorporated into existing hotels,
manufacturing units, warehouses and office
complexes during retrofits.

Targets and Performance
In order to continually improve on energy
performance, ITC Businesses have set voluntary
specific energy reduction targets. Accordingly
targets have been set at the Unit level for
maintaining this performance.
Since Units of Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Business account for 89.6% of ITC’s total energy
consumption, greater focus is directed towards
the energy performance of each manufacturing
Unit of this Business, performance of which
against the targets are as follows:

Comparison Comparison
Unit
against
against
of
last year
target
Measurement

Primary Factors

	 Non availability of wind power from

l

own wind farms due to interstate
wheeling problems between states
of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana

l	This

Bhadrachalam

Kovai

31.2

13.8

30.6

13.5

31.4

11.6

GJ/MT

2.6%
higher

non-availability of electricity
had to be compensated by
electricity generated in-house (with
attendant auxiliary consumption
and conversion loss from fuel
to energy)

0.6%
increase

GJ/MT

14.1%
lower

15.9%
decrease
20.0%
decrease
Same

l	

Increase in pulp generated in own
pulp mill by 10%

l	

Commissioning and stabilisation of
new lime kiln

	 Improvement in boiler efficiency

l

	 Replacement of 2 old boilers and

l

Tribeni

47.5

46.6

38.0

GJ/MT

18.5%
lower

Bollaram

0.8

0.8

0.8

GJ/MT

Same

turbines with new boiler and turbine
resulting in system efficiency
improvement

For computation methodology of energy consumption within organisation, please refer to Quantification Methodologies: Energy and
GHG Emissions.

82

Environmental
Performance

Energy Consumption
Outside of the Organisation
During 2014-15, ITC has expanded
the upstream boundary of energy
accounting. Accordingly 2,558 TJ of energy
consumed outside of the organisation
has been accounted for during the year.
Quality of data continues to be a challenge
in the third party manufacturing facilities of

areas for improvement, in 2010 ITC initiated
the life cycle assessment (LCA) for its
products. So far life cycle assessments
of products from Paper, Paperboards &
Packaging and Lifestyle Retailing Businesses
have been carried out which have helped in
identifying broad areas for improvements
as well as building internal competencies
for such type of studies. These assessments
have been followed up with detailed studies

Energy Consumption

Inbound
Outbound
transportation transportation
of raw
of products
materials
and wastes

Employee
commuting

Local road
travel by
Hotels
Business
guests

Exclusive Third Party
Manufacturers (TPMs)
catering to notebooks
segment of Education and
Stationery Products Business;
2 exclusive TPMs of
Cigarettes Business;
ATC Limited (an associate
company)

Life cycle
assessments have
been followed
up with detailed
studies which in
turn have provided
concrete solutions
towards more
efficient packaging
designs, loading
efficiencies and
consequent
reduction in
transportation
costs/GHG
emissions/energy
use

For computation methodology, please refer to Annexure — Quantification Methodology: Energy and
GHG Emissions.

Education and Stationery Products Business.
Capacity building and regular review of
performance data will continue in order
to improve the data quality in the coming
years. The boundary of accounting will be
progressively expanded in the years to come,
based on ITC’s ability to overcome challenges
with regard to data quality.
With an objective to evaluate the impacts
in the value chain and to identify additional

which in turn have provided concrete
solutions towards more efficient packaging
designs, loading efficiencies and consequent
reduction in transportation costs/GHG
emissions/energy use.
Going forward, ITC intends to undertake more
LCA studies for evaluating hotspots in the
value chain of its products and services and
identify further opportunities for optimisation.

The Road Ahead
Moving towards 50% renewable energy share by 2020

Addressing Impacts in the Value Chain

1.	 Continuation of the management approach in terms of:
l	Energy audits, benchmarking and target setting for
progressively reducing specific energy consumption
(energy per unit of product/service)
l	Investment in renewable energy assets based on
techno-commercial feasibility
l	Continuous monitoring and review of performance
through Integrated Sustainability Data Management
System (ISDMS)
2.	 Redesign of strategy if warranted according to the
dynamics of the economy

1.	 Progressive accounting of energy footprint of
goods and services along the value chain within the
sustainability reporting boundary
2.	 Engagement with supply chain members for
improvement of energy performance
3.	 Reduction of energy consumption in transportation of
raw materials, finished goods and wastes

	 Life cycle assessment studies for evaluation of the opportunity for energy reduction in the value chain of products/
services and taking necessary corrective actions
u	 Development of internal capacities and use of LCA as a tool for product design and development by each business
u

83

Air
Emissions

Management
Approach
The adverse impact on the environment
due to air emissions is complex, long-term
and inter-related. Climate change caused
by Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions has
already begun to change precipitation
patterns across the globe including in
India, thereby disrupting yields in primarily
rain-fed Indian agriculture. Since most of
ITC’s businesses depend significantly on
agri-inputs, disruption in crop yields and
consequent competition for agricultural
commodities, has wide-ranging implications
on ITC and its stakeholders. Recognising the
fact that is necessary to play an active role on
the issue of climate change, ITC has focused
on progressively increasing its renewable
energy share and enhancing sequestration
of GHGs aligned with Government of India’s
National Action Plan on Climate Change.

Another aspect linked with rapid
industrialisation and urbanisation is the
problem of air pollution in terms of emissions
of SO2, NOX and particulate matter that has
become a very serious health issue across
almost the entire urban landscape in India.
This not only has huge adverse impacts on
health of human beings but also on the
biodiversity of a region. ITC has continued
to invest in reducing air emission levels
through focus on cleaner technologies/
combustion efficiency improvement while
simultaneously reducing specific energy
consumption and increasing ITC’s renewable
energy share.

ITC has focused
on progressively
increasing its
renewable
energy share
and enhancing
sequestration of
GHGs aligned with
Government of
India’s National
Action Plan on
Climate Change

ITC has mapped the various challenges
arising from GHG and other air emissions
that may impact its own operations or its
stakeholders and devised strategies driven
by Board approved policies addressing the
various dimensions involved.

85

Sustainable
Livelihoods

ITC’s
Sustainability
Policies
Addressing these
Challenges

Challenges
from GHG
and other Air
Emissions

	Extreme weather events posing a major
threat to ITC properties in coastal areas –
disruption in operations, rail and road traffic
links, in turn affecting supply of essential
raw materials and finished goods.

	 Reinforcing the protection of our assets in
coastal areas.

l

l

	
Developing
appropriate
contingency
and insurance plans for uninterrupted
production and delivery, in situations of
extreme weather events.

l

	 Volatility in energy prices.

l

	Adopting a low carbon growth path by
setting a 50% renewable energy share
target by 2020.

l

	Existing regulatory requirements such
as the Perform, Achieve, Trade (PAT) and
Renewable Energy Certificates (REC)
schemes.

l

	Future regulatory pressures – carbon
tax or additional requirements under the
Perform, Achieve, Trade (PAT) and REC.
	Air pollution in terms of emissions of
SO2, NOX, particulate matter etc. from
combustion of fuels.

Policy on
Life-cycle
Sustainability

	Severe changes in precipitation patterns
owing to climate change could significantly
disrupt rain-fed agriculture.

Policy on
Environment,
Health and
Safety

	Disruption in crop yields leading to
increased competition for agricultural
commodities due to:

Policy on
Responsible
Sourcing

l

l

è

è

	
Energy conservation through energy
audits, benchmarking and target setting
for progressively reducing specific
energy consumption (energy per unit of
product/service).

l

l

l

ITC
Strategy

	Investment in renewable energy assets
based on techno-commercial feasibility.

l

	Continuous monitoring and review of
performance through an organisationwide data management system.

l

	
Continued investment in reducing air
emission levels through adoption of
cleaner technologies/fuels, monitoring of
combustion efficiencies and investment in
state-of-the-art pollution control equipment.

l

	
Adverse impact on water availability
in snow-fed rivers owing to retreating
glaciers.

l

	
Increased
temperatures
productivity.

l

impacting

	Ensuring the sustainability of agriculture
through integrated watershed development
and soil and moisture conservation projects.
	
Evaluating
agricultural
productivity/
adaptation issues related to climate
change and providing support to farmers.
	Enhancing GHG sequestration through
afforestation programmes.

l

	Life-cycle based approach embedded in
the design and development of products
and services:

l

Within Boundary

86

Beyond Boundary

è

	
Progressive inclusion of performance
of supply chain partners within the
sustainability reporting boundary.

è

	
Reduction of GHG emissions in
transportation of raw materials, finished
goods and wastes.

Environmental
Performance

ITC’s Performance
on Greenhouse
Gases

ITC has computed its Greenhouse
Gas (GHG) inventory, including GHG
emissions, biogenic carbon dioxide
(CO2) emissions and GHG removals,
in accordance with ISO 14064:2006,
which is the latest international
standard specifying principles and
requirements at the organisation level
for quantification and reporting of
GHG emissions and removals.

Based on applicability, ITC has accounted
for the following gases in its GHG inventory:
Carbon Dioxide (CO2), Methane (CH4),
Nitrous Oxide (N2O), Hydrofluorocarbons
(HFCs), Perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and Sulphur
Hexafluoride (SF6). Provided below is a
comparison of ITC’s GHG inventory for 201415 with that for 2013-14:

4,529

6,000
5,000

4,896

The 2014-15 inventory has been
verified by KPMG at the “Reasonable
Assurance” level.

1,613
193

202

183

177

860

1,000

742

1,143

2,000

1,234

3,000

1,519

4,000

0
Direct GHG
Emissions
(Scope 1)

2013-14

CO2 Emissions
Energy
from
Indirect GHG
combustion of Emissions
(Scope 2)
biomass
2014-15

Other
Indirect GHG
Emissions
(Scope 3)

Total GHG
Emissions

(excluding CO2
Emissions from
combustion of
biomass)

GHG
Removals

All above figures are rounded off and are in kilotonnes.

87

Sustainable
Livelihoods

ITC has continued
to invest in
reducing air
emission levels
through focus
on cleaner
technologies/
combustion
efficiency
improvement while
simultaneously
reducing
specific energy
consumption and
increasing ITC’s
renewable energy
share

Deviations in GHG emissions between 2014-15 and 2013-14 are primarily attributable to the
following factors:
Decrease in Direct GHG (Scope 1) emissions
	Decrease in fossil fuel utilisation due to increased availability of biomass as fuel in
the Paperboards and Specialty Papers Business (Please refer to “Energy” Section for
further details).

l

Increase in CO2 emissions from combustion of biomass
l	Increased utilisation of biomass as fuel in the Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Business Units.
l	 Inclusion of CO emissions from indirect sources of renewable energy in the form of:
2
	 è	 Purchased steam generated from biomass in Pune Unit of Foods Business and
Bengaluru Unit of Cigarettes Business,
	 è	 Purchased electricity generated from biomass in ITC Kakatiya, a subsidiary unit.
Increase in Energy Indirect GHG (Scope 2) emissions
	Inclusion of additional Units/activities into the reporting boundary as detailed in
“Energy” section of this Report.

l

Decrease in Other Indirect GHG (Scope 3) emissions
	Primarily due to reduction in imported raw materials and optimisation of
transportation logistics.

l

ITC’s efforts in energy reduction across various
Units have helped control GHG emissions in
2014-15. In 2014-15, 25,845 tonnes of GHG
emissions (Scope 1 & 2) were avoided by the:
	Implementation of energy conservation
measures leading to savings in both direct
and indirect energy and

l

88

	Fuel switching measures (Please refer to
Energy consumption within ITC across
Businesses in the “Energy” section for
details on renewable energy share of each
Business):

l

Environmental
Performance

Carbon Positive

29,933 hectares
of plantations
added during
2014-15 under
Social and
Farm Forestry
Initiatives

Total plantations
as on March 31,
2015 at 1,93,072
hectares

48,96,321
tonnes of CO2
sequestered in
this year

ITC Carbon
Positive for 10
years in a row

GHG Emissions and CO2 Sequestration

4896*

4785

6000

4529*

4380
4011

5000

3690

3695

4000

2638

3000
1013

1058

1202

2025

2000

1709
906

1000

1244

1143

1352

1572

311

2046
1564

1475

839

1613

742

1519
860

0
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15

CO2e Emission (Scope 1, 2
& 3) in kilotonnes

CO2 Sequestered
in kilotonnes

CO2e Emissions from Combustion of Biomass
in kilotonnes (computed since 2012-13)

All above figures are rounded off
*Dip in CO2 sequestration in 2010-11 caused by reduced productivity of Eucalyptus plantations due to infestation in some areas and lesser
incremental addition of plantation area.
* Dip in CO2 sequestration in 2012-13 is primarily due to the revision in methodology of computing CO2 sequestration in order to comply with
ISO 14064:2006 requirements.
* Increase in CO2 sequestration in 2013-14 and 2014-15 is primarily due to increase in the planted area of Subabul and Casuarina species as
compared to the previous years.

89

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Targets and Performance
In order to continually improve upon GHG
emissions performance, some of ITC’s
Businesses have voluntarily set specific GHG
emissions reduction targets at the Business/
Unit levels.
Since the Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Business accounts for around 80% of ITC’s
total Scope 1 and 2 GHG emissions, focus has
been directed at the specific GHG emissions
(including Scope 1 and 2 emissions) against
targets set for the manufacturing units of
this Business:

Units of
Paperboards
and Specialty
Papers
Business

Specific GHG Emissions
(tCO2e/MT)
Actual
Target
Actual
for
for
for
2013-14 2014-15 2014-15

Comparison
against
target

Comparison
against last
year

Remarks

	 Increased production of pulp to
replace imported pulp, which led
to higher generation of black liquor
and subsequent combustion in soda
recovery boilers.

l

Bhadrachalam

1.67*

1.67

1.56

7% lower

7% decrease

27% lower

	 Energy conservation measures e.g.
Improvement in boiler efficiency.
27% decrease l	 Higher utilisation of biomass fuels
viz. wood chips, saw dust and deoiled bran.

	 Energy conservation measures e.g.
Replacement of 3 vacuum pumps with
one energy efficient vacuum pump,
optimisation of power consumption
of high capacity motors by installing
variable frequency drives, etc.

l

l

Kovai

1.08

1.08

0.79

	 Energy conservation measures e.g.
Replacement of 2 old boilers and
turbines with new boiler and turbine
resulting in efficiency improvement.

l

Tribeni

4.79*

4.70

3.70

21% lower

23% decrease

	 Non availability of gas-based power
purchased from third party due
to interstate wheeling problems
between Andhra Pradesh and
Telangana – this non-availability of
electricity had to be compensated
by electricity generated through inhouse diesel generators.

l

Bollaram

0.10

0.098

0.15

53% higher

50% increase

* Values restated with respect to previous year’s reported data: GHG emissions due to energy consumed in integrated township deducted while
estimating specific GHG emissions (tCO2e per metric tonne of production)

90

Environmental
Performance

Impacts in the Value Chain
ITC’s accounting of Scope 3 GHG emissions
included monitoring and reporting of
emissions from sources as depicted below:

To set organisational boundaries for
consolidated GHG emissions, ITC has
utilised the operational control approach
for the various entities covered under
the Report. ITC’s accounting of Scope

Scope 3 GHG Emissions

Inbound
transportation
of raw
materials

Outbound
transportation
of products
and wastes

Employee
commuting

Pick-up
and drop
of guests
in ITC
Hotels

Exclusive Third Party
Manufacturers (TPMs)
catering to notebooks
segment of Education
and Stationery Products
Business;

ITC’s efforts in
energy reduction
across various
Units have helped
control GHG
emissions in 201415. In 2014-15,
25,845 tonnes of
GHG emissions
(Scope 1 & 2) were
avoided

2 exclusive TPMs of
Cigarettes Business;
ATC Limited – an
associate company

ITC’s efforts to optimise distribution logistics
of finished goods for its FMCG Businesses
have helped control GHG emissions in
2014-15. Specific Scope 3 emissions due to
transportation of FMCG products (Cigarettes,
Personal Care and Foods) in 2014-15 have
decreased by around 5% (tonnes of CO2e
emission/tonne of product transported) as
compared to the previous year for the same
product categories. This has been achieved
by improvement in vehicle utilisation capacity
across the supply chain and extensive network
de-layering in order to increase direct
shipments to destination warehouses, thereby
avoiding intermediate movements.

1, 2 & 3 GHG emissions is based on the
‘GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and
Reporting Standard’ and the ‘GHG Protocol
Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting
and Reporting Standard’ issued by the
World Resources Institute (WRI) and the
World Business Council for Sustainable
Development (WBCSD).
The standards, methodologies, tools and
assumptions used for quantification of the
GHG emissions and removals by various
sources, have been explained at length in
the Annexure – Quantification Methodology:
Energy and GHG Emissions.

91

Sustainable
Livelihoods

ITC’s Performance
on Other
Significant Air
Emissions

600

867

704

592

800

776

781

1000

883

All ITC Units monitor significant
air emission parameters, such as
Particulate Matter (PM), Nitrogen
Oxides (NOX) and Sulphur Dioxide (SO2)
on a regular basis to ensure compliance
with internal norms that are more
stringent than regulatory requirements.

400
200
0

NOX in tonnes

Particulate Matter in
tonnes
2013-14

SO2 in tonnes

2014-15

The decrease in the total emissions over last
year was primarily due to the continuous
interventions undertaken in Paperboards
and Specialty Papers Business (which
contributed 82% of the total air emissions in
ITC during 2014-15) towards improvement in
fuel combustion efficiencies and air emission
control measures.

Snapshot of Bhadrachalam
Unit’s performance
Owing to the continuous initiatives
undertaken, there has been a consistent
decrease in specific air emissions in terms
of particulate matter, NOX and SO2 emissions
for the Bhadrachalam unit.

Particulate Matter

2

kg per BDMT

1.5

1.54
1.32

1

1.00

0.96

0.97
0.66

0.5
0
2009-10

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

Particulate Matter (kg/BDMT of Production) # BDMT - Bone Dry Metric Tonne

92

Environmental
Performance
Particulate
matter
emission
for
Bhadrachalam has reduced by 57% from
1.54 kg/BDMT of production in 2009-10 to
0.66 kg/BDMT of production in 2014-15. As
per the Centre for Science & Environment

(Source: All About Paper – The life cycle of
Indian Pulp and Paper Industry, Green Rating
Project, 2004), the average particulate
matter emission by large scale Indian Mills is
3.8 kg/BDMT.

NOX and SO2 Emissions
0.9

0.79

0.74

0.8

0.61

0.7

0.53

kg/tonne

0.6
0.5

0.6

0.51

0.58

0.4

0.36
0.46

0.3

0.35

0.2

0.33

0.1

0.16

0
2009-10

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

Specific NOX Emissions
(kg/tonne)

2013-14

2014-15

Specific SO2 Emissions
(kg/tonne)

Standards for NOX
(kg/tonne)

Standards for SO2
(kg/tonne)

Sweden

1.2-2.4

0.5-1.4

EU

1.0-1.8

0.1-0.5

EU-BAT*

1.0-1.5

0.2-0.4

0.73

0.157

Reported Values
CEPI**

Sources - 1. Comprehensive Industry Document for Large-Scale Pulp & Paper Mills study by CPPRI, published
by CPCB, 2007
*EU-BAT: EU Norm Best Available Technology
2. ** CEPI – Confederation of European Paper Industries (CEPI) Sustainability Report 2005 reported the average
specific SO2 and specific NOX values for European Paper Industries in 2002; CEPI Sustainability Report 2013
indicated the reduction in specific SO2 and NOX values for European Paper Industries from 2002 to 2012.

93

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Hydrogen Sulphide Emissions

12

The primary source of hydrogen sulphide
emissions in the integrated pulp and paper
mill at Bhadrachalam is the soda recovery
boilers in which black liquor is used to
produce steam and recover chemicals. In
2014-15, hydrogen sulphide emissions
for the Unit have marginally increased
in comparison to 2013-14 since the unit
utilised an increased quantity of domestic
wood resulting in higher generation of virgin
pulp and in turn higher volumes of black
liquor being combusted in the soda recovery
boilers. However, the emission level is well
below the regulatory norm.

10

6

10

4
3.72

2

4.21

mg/nM3

8

0
Hydrogen Sulphide
Regulatory Norm

2013-14

2014-15

Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS)
In 2014-15, the total consumption of ODS by all ITC Units was 108.7 kg of CFC-11 equivalent.
ITC’s ODS Phase-out Plan

Procurement of
new equipment
which are free of
Chlorofluorocarbons
(CFC), Halons and
Methyl Chloroform
(MCF)

94

Monitoring
and reducing
consumption
of ODS

Replacement of
all the existing
equipment using
ODS well before
the stipulated
phase-out period

Recovery of
all the ODS from
the equipment
being replaced for
recycling or safe
disposal

Environmental
Performance

Responsible Management of
Chemicals, Oils and Fuels
All ITC Units manage chemicals, oils and fuels
as per norms defined by the Company, which
take into account all statutory requirements
and international best practices. These
norms are taken into consideration right
from the design stage and include measures
for leakage/spillage prevention, provisions
for containment, impervious flooring, leak
detection system as well as all requirements
as per Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for
hazardous chemicals. To avoid any incidence

of uncontrolled spills or leakage, ITC has
instituted safe work practices on handling
and storage, procedures for leak detection
& spill control and preventive maintenance.
The effectiveness of these measures is
checked on a regular basis.
We also continuously evaluate the feasibility
of substituting hazardous chemicals with
less or non-hazardous materials. In 201415, there was no significant spillage of any
chemical, oil, fuel or hazardous waste in any
of ITC’s Units.

The Road Ahead
Reduction in GHG Emissions

Reduction in Other Air Emissions

Impacts within Boundary
For GHG Emissions - Moving towards 50% renewable energy share by 2020 by
continuing with the strategy of:
	 Energy audits, benchmarking and target setting for progressively reducing specific
energy consumption (energy per unit of product/service).

l

	 Investment in renewable energy assets based on techno-commercial feasibility.

l

	 Continuous monitoring and review of performance.

l

For Other Air Emissions - Continue to focus on:
	 Improvement of combustion efficiencies of fuels.

l

	 State-of-the-art pollution control equipment.

l

Impacts in Value Chain
For GHG Emissions
1.	Reduction of GHG emissions in transportation of raw materials, finished goods
and wastes.
2.	Enhancing GHG sequestration through afforestation programmes, details on
which are provided in “Social Investments – Mission Sunehra Kal” section.
3.	Ensuring the sustainability of agri-inputs through integrated watershed
development and soil and moisture conservation projects in catchment areas.
4.	 Encouraging supply chain partners for reduction of GHG emissions.
For Other Air Emissions - To work towards evaluation of other air emissions from
the transport fleets involved in ITC’s distribution logistics and to draw a roadmap for
addressing the impacts.
u

	Life cycle assessment studies for evaluation of the hotspots in the value chain
of products/services and taking necessary corrective actions.

u

	Development of internal capacities and use of LCA as a tool for product design
and development by each business.

95

Water
Management

Management
Approach
Global water requirements are projected to
exceed available sustainable water supplies
by 40% by 20301. The issue of water crisis
plagues large parts of the world including
Africa, parts of North America and Asia.
India is particularly vulnerable to water
stress given the rapid urbanisation and
industrialisation at a time when rainfall
patterns are seeing disruption and snow fed
rivers are being threatened both by retreating
glaciers and geopolitical pressures on
diversion of headwaters of rivers originating
in the Tibetan Plateau. ITC has sought to
engage actively with multilateral agencies
like the World Business Council for
Sustainable Development (WBCSD), World
Resources Institute (WRI), International
Water Management Institute (IWMI) etc.
to share experiences and also improve
understanding of the complex social and

technical issues related to water. ITC has also
actively supported the development of the
India Water Tool as a working group member,
an activity coordinated by the WBCSD. This
tool permits a first level analysis of water
risks across the country, an issue that is
becoming increasingly real in the Indian
context. ITC, through its deep and longstanding relationship with rural India has
first-hand insights of what water scarcity
and climate change means to the marginal
farmers of India.
As a proactive and responsible Corporate
citizen, ITC has invested significantly in
integrated watershed and soil management
programmes that focus on institution
building and participative management of
water resources by farmers. As a next step
ITC is in the process of fine tuning a long
term strategy for ensuring water security
at the localised watershed level for all
stakeholders and for all operating units
located at identified high water risk areas.

1

Source: Charting our Water Future, Report by 2030 Water Resources Group, 2009

97

Sustainable
Livelihoods

ITC’s
Sustainability
Policies
Addressing these
Challenges

Challenges
from Water
Stress

	With continuous decline in ground water
and uneven supply of surface water, it
may become even more challenging for
businesses to meet their requirements.

	Conducting water audits, benchmarking
and implementation of best practices for
reducing water intake.

l

l

	Target setting for progressively reducing
specific water intake (water per unit of
product/service).

l

	Additional regulatory limits on water
withdrawal owing to challenges from
decrease in water availability.

l

	 Continuous monitoring of performance and
management review through Integrated
Sustainability Data Management System (ISDMS).

l

	Largely rain-fed farming in India, with
around 55% of net sown area meeting its
water requirements from rainwater alone
and agriculture providing employment to
over 50% of the workforce.

l

	 Due to absence of adequate infrastructure
support, any significant disruption in
rainfall patterns resulting from climate
change may lead to considerable adverse
impacts on agricultural yields.

l

	Water availability especially critical for
ITC, as most of its businesses depend
significantly on agri-inputs.

l

	
Impact on water quality owing
disruptions in rainfall patterns.

l

to

Policy on
Environment,
Health and
Safety

l

Policy on
Life-cycle
Sustainability

l

Policy on
Responsible
Sourcing

	
Increased ground water mining is
exacerbating an issue that has already
assumed critical dimensions due to
contamination as well as inadequate
recharge.
	Poor water quality requiring additional
treatment and additional expenses before
it can become usable.

l

	
Risk of localised contamination like
arsenic, fluoride, etc., already prevalent
in some of the states, which is expected to
increase leading to severe potential health
hazards.

l

98

	Treating effluent so as to ensure that
discharge quality is better than statutory
requirements and progressing towards
recycling/reusing of all treated effluent
within or outside ITC premises.

l

l

Within Boundary

ITC
Strategy

Beyond Boundary

	Evaluation of water availability/stress at
ITC Units on the basis of data available with
Government agencies.
	Engagement with external stakeholders
for assessment and mitigation of water
related risks at the local watershed level.
	 Life cycle based approach for understanding
impacts across the value chain.

l

	Ensuring the sustainability of agriculture
through integrated watershed development
including rainwater harvesting and soil
and moisture conservation projects
particularly in regions where ITC sources
its raw materials from.

l

	Grassroots capacity building for proper
governance in agricultural water usage.

l

	 Enhancing ITC’s water positive footprint
through rainwater harvesting, both within ITC’s
Units and across different watershed areas.

l

	Responsible water stewardship actions
– working towards meeting the water
security needs of all stakeholders at the
local watershed level.

l

Environmental
Performance

ITC’s Performance

The increase in total water intake can be
attributed primarily to the inclusion of the
following Units/activities into the reporting
boundary – Snacks and Noodles Unit of
Foods Business at Malur (Karnataka),
clonal plantation development activities of
Paperboards and Specialty Papers Business
at Bhadrachalam, ITC Grand Bharat in
Gurgaon and My Fortune Bengaluru of
the Hotels Business, together with Classic
Golf Resort in Gurgaon, ITC Kakatiya in
Hyderabad and Fortune Resort Bay Island in
Andaman and Nicobar Islands being units of
subsidiary companies.

Water Withdrawal
In 2014-15, ITC Units withdrew 34.48 million
kilolitres (kl) of water, an increase of only
2% over the previous year (33.73 million kl
in 2013-14) despite expansion in reporting
boundary. This performance is attributable to
the ongoing initiatives undertaken towards
water conservation across ITC Units.
Of the 34.48 million kl of total water
withdrawn, 76.1% of water resources were
sourced from rivers, 21.3% from ground
water sources and only 2.6% from municipal
and other water sources.

ITC has actively
supported the
development of the
India Water Tool
that permits a first
level analysis of
water risks across
the country

Although with the reporting boundary
expansion, there has been an increase in
total water withdrawal by ITC, focused efforts
by all Units to reduce intake by conducting
water audits, benchmarking and adopting
leading practices facilitated the reduction
of specific water intake as illustrated in the
following sections.

Sources of 34.48 million kl of Total Water
Withdrawn by ITC in 2014-15

21.3%

In order to maintain its performance, ITC
Businesses have set voluntary specific
water intake reduction targets at the Unit/
Business level.

2.6%
76.1%

Considering the fact that Paperboards and
Specialty Papers Business Units together
accounted for around 89% of total water
intake of ITC as demonstrated below, it is
logical that significant efforts have been
focused on the performance of the Units
under this Business.

Surface Water
Municipal Water & Others
Ground Water

0.03
Bollaram +
Divisional
Head Office

Rest of ITC

1.18
Kovai

PSPD

4.37

Tribeni

30.82

25.24

Bhadrachalam

3.66

Total Water Withdrawal in million kl

Total Water Intake of Paperboards
and Specialty Papers Business and
the Rest of ITC (million kl)

99

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Paperboards Unit at
Bhadrachalam
India’s largest integrated paper and
paperboards mill accounted for 73.2% of the
total freshwater intake in ITC. In 2014-15,
the Bhadrachalam Unit’s freshwater intake
was 42.6 kl per tonne of product, a reduction
of 5% over the previous year’s 45.1 kl/tonne,

primarily due to various water conservation
initiatives undertaken by the Unit e.g.
pipeline modification for increasing usage
of paper machine back water, optimisation
of water needed for pulp dilution etc. The
persistent efforts of the Unit towards water
conservation are evident in the consistently
decreasing trend of specific water intake as
depicted below.

Specific Water Intake (kl/tonne)

Proposed NPC Benchmark Standard of 63 kl/tonne for large scale integrated pulp
and paper mills (Reference: Final Report on Development of Guidelines for
Water Conservation in Pulp and Paper Sector by NPC, New Delhi, March 2006.)
70
60

54.67

50

100

48.22

46.39

45.07

2012-13

2013-14

43.30

42.63

Target for
2014-15

2014-15

40
30
20
10
0
2009-10

ITC has invested
significantly
in integrated
watershed and
soil management
programmes
that focus on
institution building
and participative
management of
water resources by
farmers

50.47

2010-11

2011-12

Environmental
Performance

Specialty Papers Unit
at Tribeni
ITC’s Unit at Tribeni manufactures specialty
paper, which is a water intensive process.
The Unit has achieved around 6% reduction
of specific water intake per tonne of
product during the reporting period over the
previous year primarily due to the initiatives
undertaken to achieve reduction in specific
water intake like increase in recovery of paper
machine back water and reuse in the machine,
removal of additional perforated showers for
wire section of paper machine etc.

Specific Water Intake
(kl/tonne)

130
125
124.24

120
115
110

116.59

*114.55

115.88

110.00

107.76

105

107.76

100
95
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 Target for 2014-15
2014-15

*Increase of 6.3% in 2013-14 over the previous year was primarily due to the commissioning activities of the
new power plant at Tribeni.
Note: There is no specific NPC benchmark standard for Tribeni

Paperboards Unit at Kovai

Cast Coating Unit at Bollaram

Water conservation measures including
increased recycling of treated effluent and
use in process, installation of new cooling
tower in board machine etc. undertaken by
the Unit led to the reduction in specific water
intake from 13.75 kl/tonne in 2013-14 to
11.60 kl/tonne in 2014-15.

The target of 0.48 kl/tonne for 2014-15 could
not be achieved as decrease in production
resulted in specific water intake of 0.53 kl/
tonne (actual performance was 0.52 kl/tonne
in 2013-14).

Specific Water Intake in Kovai
(kl/tonne)

Proposed NPC Benchmark Standard of 19 kl/tonne for recycled fibre based paper mills

20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

16.65
13.09

2009-10

13.97

15.94
13.75

13.20
11.60

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14 Target for 2014-15
2014-15

101

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Effluent
Treated Effluent Discharged by Destination
Common
Effluent
Treatment
Plant
0.2%

Total volume of
24.24 million kl of
treated effluent
was discharged
outside the
premises by ITC
units

Municipal
Sewers
0.5%

Irrigation
outside
premises
67.5%

Surface
Water
Bodies
31.8%

Effluent Discharge
The two Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Units at Bhadrachalam and Tribeni accounted
for 98.9% of total wastewater discharged
outside Unit premises in ITC and 67.8% of
the water discharged outside from these
two Units was utilised for irrigation purpose.
Therefore specific focus has been accorded
to the performance of these 2 Units in terms
of treated effluent discharge volume as well
as quality.

Bhadrachalam Unit has been reaping the
benefits of initiatives undertaken towards
recycling of treated effluent as is evident from
the continually decreasing trend of specific
treated effluent discharged. For Tribeni Unit,
the specific treated effluent discharged has
increased from 59.2 kl/tonne to 66.7 kl/tonne.
This is due to the installation of a new boiler,
which required additional treatment to meet
specified water quality standards and resulted
in increased discharge of treated effluent in
2014-15 with respect to 2013-14.

Specific Treated Eﬄuent Discharge in ITC Paperboards and Specialty Papers Units (kl/tonne)

NPC benchmark standard** of 50 kl/tonne for
integrated pulp and paper industry

NPC benchmark standard absent for Specialty
Papers Industry

80

74.4

70
60

59.1

63.9

68.5

72.5 71.1

63 63.7

59.6

66.7
59.8 59.2

48 44.9 45

50

43.4 41.8
40.4

40
30
20
10
0

Bhadrachalam
2006-07

2007-08

2008-09

Tribeni
2009-10

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

**Reference: National Productivity Council (NPC)’s Final Report on Development of Guidelines for Water Conservation in Pulp and Paper Sector
by NPC, New Delhi, March 2006.

102

Environmental
Performance
Specific Treated Eﬄuent Discharged (kl/tonne) for Kovai Unit
NPC benchmark standard of 15 kl/tonne for wastepaper-based pulp and paper mills

18
16

kl/tonne

14
11.3

12

9.3

10

8.1

8

6.9

6
4
2
0

0

0

0

0

0

2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
Since 2010-11, the wastepaper-based pulp and paper mill at Kovai has not discharged
any treated effluent outside its premises.
The quality of the treated effluent from Paperboards and Specialty Papers Units was far better
than the stipulated standards in India:

Treated Effluent Quality (mg/l)

Treated Eﬄuent Quality: Annual Average (2014-15) - Paperboards and Specialty Papers Units

300
250

250
200

166

150

110
86

100
22

50

8

6

30

100
63
14

32

0
BOD
Bhadrachalam

COD
Tribeni

Kovai

TSS
National Standard

In addition, the quality of the treated effluent from Bhadrachalam Unit was comparable with
European standards:

Parameters

Bhadrachalam
(kg/tonne of finished product)

European Paper Industries#
(kg/tonne of finished product)

BOD

0.90

0.816

COD

6.69

5.713

#Reference: Confederation of European Paper Industries (CEPI) Sustainability Report 2005 reported the
average specific BOD and specific COD values for European Paper Industries in 2002; CEPI Sustainability
Report 2013 indicated the reduction in specific AOX value for European Paper Industries from 2002 to 2012.

103

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Unit

Reference

Bhadrachalam
Unit

Specific AOX
Level in Kg/
tonne of finished
product
0.0097

Benchmarks
1

MoEFCC standard
Indian Paper/
Paperboard mills

Average as per Comprehensive Industry Document
for Large-Scale Paper Mills, study conducted by
Central Pulp and Paper Research Institute, 2007

0.46-0.8

European Paper
Industries

Confederation of European Paper Industries
(CEPI) Sustainability Report 2005 reported the
average specific AOX value for European Paper
Industries in 2002; CEPI Sustainability Report 2013
mentioned the reduction in specific AOX value for
European Paper Industries from 2002 to 2012

0.019

World Bank
Standard

World Bank Guideline for New Paper Mills (2007)

0.25

Another critical parameter applicable only
to ITC’s Bhadrachalam Unit is the level of
adsorbable organic halides (AOX) generated
during the bleaching process. These
compounds are formed as a result of reaction
between residual lignin from wood fibres
and chlorine compounds used for bleaching.
Depicted above is the specific AOX level for
Bhadrachalam Unit for the year 2014-15
showing that the level is well below the norm
stipulated by Ministry of Environment, Forest

and Climate Change (MoEFCC) as well as
national and international benchmarks.
ITC is committed to achieving zero effluent
discharge through treating and recycling of
all wastewater and harvesting of rainwater
on its properties. This not only reduces water
intake but also maximises groundwater
recharge, reduces run-off etc. In 2014-15,
the following Units achieved the goal of zero
effluent discharge:

Cigarette Factories at Bengaluru, Saharanpur & Pune, Leaf Processing Units at Anaparti,
Chirala & Mysuru, Packaging & Printing Unit at Tiruvottiyur, Snacks and Noodles
Unit at Malur, Life Sciences & Technology Centre at Bengaluru, Research Centre at
Rajahmundry, Paperboards and Specialty Papers Business Units at Kovai and Bollaram,
Personal Care Products Business Unit at Manpura, Lifestyle Retailing Business Unit at
Manesar, Hotel Units ITC Maratha in Mumbai, ITC Rajputana at Jaipur, ITC Grand Bharat
and ITC Green Centre at Gurgaon.

104

Environmental
Performance

With the intent of progressing towards water
stewardship, ITC has started carrying out
appropriate studies at identified Units to
develop a comprehensive understanding of
issues involved. A pilot project to this effect
has been initiated at one of ITC’s surface
water intensive Units:

ii.	 De-silting of cascading storage tank beds
and repairing damaged infrastructure of
small tanks should also be considered a
priority investment, not only to enhance
water storage and financial benefits to
local communities, but also to augment
river flows in non-monsoon seasons.

The study focused on the following:

iii.	As far as waste water is concerned, the
industries should address perceived
water quality issues that have been raised
by some stakeholders. While direct water
withdrawals from the river, especially
during the non-monsoon months are vital
for sustainable operations of industries,
the access to acceptable quality return
flows can be a viable financial source for
irrigation users.

a)	 Conducting a water accounting exercise
over the entire river basin in general
and in the local catchment in particular
to understand current water availability,
water use patterns, return flows, re-use
and future demand;
b)	Assessment of environmental flows
requirement of the river basin to
understand
the
implications
of
maintaining environmental flows as a
policy on other water users and water use
in the local catchment;
c)	Evaluation of potential surface and
sub-surface interventions, including
management of aquifer recharge and
cascading storage tank rejuvenation
to augment water supply in the local
catchment, as well as cost-benefit
analysis of the identified interventions.

Key recommendations included:
i.	 Management of aquifer recharge should
be implemented in high and moderate
potential zones, either through private or
public partnership or both for increasing
water availability for all sectors.

iv.	 A potential location to start intervention
in the local catchment could be a
tributary which is a seasonal river
flow with sufficient monsoon run-off.
Capturing 10 to 20% of the monsoon runoff in surface and sub-surface storage
will not only enhance water storage of the
communities there, but also proliferate
river flow in low flow months without
undue effect on environmental flows in
the monsoon months.
v.	Improvement in agricultural practices
should be focused upon to reduce
agricultural water consumption in the
local catchment since it contributes to
the bulk of withdrawal from the river.

105

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Impacts in the Value Chain
In line with the Board approved Policies on
Life-cycle Sustainability and Responsible
Sourcing, in 2014-15, ITC has initiated the
process of accounting for water intake of
supply chain members. The total water
intake for ATC Limited (an associate
Company), HDC Hyderabad and RCTI Bhopal
(exclusive third party manufacturers for
the Cigarettes Business) together was
30,451 kl. Furthermore with an objective of
understanding the impacts in the value chain

and to draw up an action plan for addressing
the key impact areas, in 2010, ITC initiated the
life cycle assessment (LCA) for its products
and till date 3 LCAs have been completed.
In 2014-15, as part of the LCA for one of
its products, ITC specifically conducted a
water footprint study for a product of the
Paperboards and Specialty Papers Business
as per the latest Standard (ISO 14046).
Details of the results of this study are
available for reference in the “Supply Chain”
section of this Report. Going forward, ITC
intends to undertake more LCA studies for
evaluating opportunities for improvement in
the value chains of its products and services
and take necessary corrective actions.

Enlarging Water Positive
Footprint
The Company’s continued interventions in
rainwater harvesting both in the Company
premises and socially relevant watershed
areas have enlarged ITC’s water positive
footprint. Details on these interventions
are available in the “Social Investments –
Mission Sunehra Kal” section of this Report.
As on March 31, 2015, ITC’s Integrated
Watershed Development Projects, covering
nearly 2,00,186 hectares of land, support the
Water Positive status of the Company for the
13th year in a row.
The total rainwater harvesting potential created by the Company so far is over two
times the net water consumption by ITC’s manufacturing operations.
Water Balance

30
19.6

Million kl

25
20
15

16.06

23.59

19.93

20.6

19.89

21.05

6.55

7.15

6.22

2009
-10

2010
-11

2011
-12

21.47

23.27

25.63

16.86

12.74

10
5

9.49

8.44

5.43

4.62

6.21

2004
-05

2005
-06

2006
-07

0
2002
-03

2003
-04

Net water consumption (=Fresh
Water Intake - Treated Effluents
Discharged)

106

25.84

8.54

8.2

2007
-08

2008
-09

9.26

9.83

10.24

2012
-13

2013
-14

2014
-15

Total RWH potential created for the year (= RWH potential
created within ITC Units + RWH potential created through
watershed projects cumulative for that year)

Environmental
Performance

For the watershed structures outside ITC
Units, the ‘RWH potential’ figures from
2008-09 account for silt deposits - the
adjustments are based on actual sample
measurement & the extent of silt deposit
depends on the age & location of a structure.

Mitigation of
water risks to
own operations

1.	
Identification of key
performance indicators
(KPIs) and setting
targets for continual
improvement
based
on internal as well as
external benchmarking.
2.	Monitoring and review
of performance against
KPIs and targets set
through
integrated
sustainability
data
management system.

The Road Ahead
While continuing its integrated watershed
management programme, ITC will be guided
by the principles of water stewardship to
ensure water security for all stakeholders
across all ITC operating Units.

Addressing
shared water
challenges in the
catchment
1.	Identification of water
security issues at the
local watershed level.
2.	Measures initiated to
achieve water security
for all stakeholders
with
review
and
public reporting of
performance.

Ensuring that responsible
water stewardship actions
are taken to minimise
negative impacts and
maximise positive impacts
1.	 Addressing water security
issues in regions where
ITC sources its agricommodities from.
2.	Integrated
watershed
development and soil and
moisture
conservation
projects in those regions.
3.	
Capacity building of
farmers to ensure selfsustenance
of
the
watershed development
programmes.

Life-cycle assessment studies for evaluation of the opportunities for improvement
in the value chain of products/services and taking necessary corrective actions.

107

Recycling
and Waste
Management

Management
Approach
The issue of waste management has assumed
critical significance for the country today.
Over the last few decades, the amount of
waste generated has gone up considerably
as a direct consequence of increasing
population, rapid and unplanned urbanisation,
higher consumption levels and inadequate
infrastructure. However as a country,
appropriate waste management mechanisms
have not received adequate focus. As a result,
most of the waste being generated today finds

its way to landfills, causing a severe strain
on the ecology. Heaps of unattended waste,
foraged by cattle and rag-pickers alike, have
become a common sight both in urban and
rural areas of the country.
Apart from the increasing pressures on
natural resources, the issue of burgeoning
waste also contributes to soil and ground
water contamination and Greenhouse Gas
(GHG) emissions, which are threatening the
quality of life throughout India.
As a responsible Corporate Citizen, ITC’s approach
on this important aspect is depicted below.

ITC’s
Sustainability
Policies
Addressing these
Challenges

Challenges
of Waste
Management

CREATING A
POSITIVE ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT

	
Waste generation from processes
affecting overall efficiency and product
competitiveness.

l

	Inadequate waste segregation at source,
leading to inefficient recoveries and more
waste diverted to landfills.
	 Inadequate infrastructure and unorganised
waste collection processes.
	Inadequate awareness and absence of
incentives/penalties necessary to change
behaviour of people to promote reducereuse-recycle of waste.

l

	 Resource Conservation
	 Reducing specific waste generation at
all ITC units through constant monitoring
and improvement of efficiencies in
material utilisation.
l

l

l

ITC
Strategy

Policy on
Environment,
Health and
Safety
Policy on
Life-cycle
Sustainability
Policy on
Responsible
Sourcing

	 Segregation at Source
	 Ensuring maximum reuse and recycling of wastes
by following ‘segregation at source’ approach.
l

	 Towards 100% Recycling
	 Tracking of each category of waste to
ensure that it can be reused wherever
possible, and if not, recycled. This ensures
that almost no waste from ITC’s businesses
lands up in municipal or private landfills.
l

	 Use of Waste as Raw Materials
	 ITC’s Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Units are encouraged to increase the
utilisation of post-consumer waste as a
source of fibre instead of virgin fibre.
l

Corporate Social
Responsibility
Policy

“WOW”: Well-being Out of Waste
Promote a clean and green environment
and create sustainable livelihoods for
rag-pickers and waste collectors, by developing
a scalable business model for post-consumer
waste recycling in collaboration with local
municipal corporations.

Within Boundary

Beyond Boundary

109

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Our Performance
Waste Generation
In 2014-15, ITC Units generated 7,91,227
tonnes of waste (7,11,887 tonnes in 201314). This 11.1% rise in total waste generated
over last year was primarily due to nonavailability of low ash content coal and
augmentation of virgin pulp production
in Bhadrachalam Unit of the Paperboards
and Specialty Papers Division. This Unit,
which accounted for 79.8% of the total
waste generated in ITC during 2014-15,
reported an increase of 16.3% in waste
generation as compared to previous year.

at Gurgaon and My Fortune at Bengaluru
of the Hotels Business, clonal plantation
development activities of Paperboards and
Specialty Papers Business at Bhadrachalam,
together with Classic Golf Resort in Gurgaon,
ITC Kakatiya in Hyderabad and Fortune
Resort Bay Island in Andaman and Nicobar
Islands, being units of subsidiary companies.
In order to continually improve performance
on resource conservation, all ITC Units have
developed systems to track and monitor the
specific waste generation (waste generated
per unit of product/service). Considering
the significant share of Paperboards and
Specialty Papers Business in the total

Business-wise break-up of wastes generated in ITC (2014-15):

Tonnes

%

Paperboards and Specialty Papers

7,21,211

91.15

Leaf Tobacco

22,198

2.81

Packaging and Printing

19,455

2.46

Foods

12,035

1.52

Cigarettes

9,417

1.19

Hotels

5,315

0.67

Personal Care Products

1,335

0.17

Others
(Offices, ITC Infotech, Lifestyle Retailing)

263

0.03

Total

7,91,227

In addition, there has been an expansion
in the reporting boundary. The following
business units/activities have been included
in the Sustainability Report for 2014-15:
Snacks and Noodles Unit of Foods Business
at Malur (Karnataka), ITC Grand Bharat

Unit

110

Specific Waste
Generation (kg/tonne)

waste generated by ITC (as demonstrated
in the above table), specific focus has been
laid on monitoring the performance of the
Units under this Business. Specific waste
generation of these Units are as follows:

Percentage
Deviation

Increase/
Decrease

Primary factors

2013-14

2014-15

Bhadrachalam

1044.3

1171.1

12.1%

Increase

Non availability of low ash content coal,
and rise in virgin pulp production (avoiding
use of imported pulp).

Bollaram

75.7

71.0

6.2%

Decrease

Process improvement and waste reduction
programmes

Kovai

209.5

210.2

0.3%

Increase

Increased use of lignite and de-oiled bran
(higher ash content as compared to coal)

Tribeni

2517.0

2055.6

18.3%

Decrease

Replacement of old boilers with a new
efficient boiler

Environmental
Performance

Specific Waste Generation of Bhadrachalam (kg/tonne of paper and paperboard)
Average generation of 1200 kg of solid waste per tonne of product
for similar integrated pulp and paper mills**

1400
1200
1000

1116

1127

1111

1171
1044

1030

800
600
400
200
0

2009-10

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

Specific Waste Generation (kg/tonne of paper and paperboard)
**Reference: Centre for Science and Environment Report, ‘All About Paper’ (2004)

Historically, due to limited options for recycling of lime sludge (a waste generated
from chemical recovery process in Bhadrachalam Unit), some amount was being
utilised by cement plants, with the bulk stored in lagoons within the premises,
incorporating adequate precautions to prevent adverse impacts on soil and ground
water. In 2014-15, the Unit tied up with more cement plants and around 14,000 tonnes
of waste was recycled through this arrangement. The accumulated quantity of lime
sludge in these lagoons is estimated to be around 2.5 lac tonnes and it is expected that
the entire amount of accumulated lime sludge will be utilised within the next 3 years.

ITC’s Paperboards
and Specialty
Papers Units
are encouraged
to increase the
utilisation of postconsumer waste
as a source of fibre
instead of virgin
fibre

111

Sustainable
Livelihoods

ITC strives to
maximise resource
efficiency in all
its Units so as
to reduce waste
generation

112

Segregation of Waste
and its Destination

The table below depicts the final
destinations of the total hazardous
wastes
generated
during
2014-15:

Of the total waste generated by ITC in 201415, only 3.2% by weight can be categorised
as hazardous waste as per Indian statutes.
94.5% of this hazardous waste was recycled
by authorised external agencies, and the
balance 5.5% was disposed off or stored
completely in accordance with applicable
statutes. All ITC Units have established
systems and procedures to verify the
relevant authorisations and licenses of
external agencies for transporting, recycling
or disposing the hazardous wastes, in
compliance with applicable regulations and
norms. Further, Corporate EHS periodically
verifies the compliance in each of the ITC
Units. During 2014-15, apart from hazardous
wastes transported to external treatment
sites by authorised transport agencies as
applicable, no other hazardous wastes were
transported between locations owned or
managed by the organisation.

Total hazardous waste and its Destination
(2014-15)

Total hazardous waste
generated

25,111

Hazardous waste carried
over from previous year and
disposed in 2014-15

40

Recycled

23,771

Incineration + Landfill

1,314

On-site storage

66
(All values in Tonnes)

During 2014-15, out of the total non-hazardous
waste generated in ITC Units, 99.97% waste
was reused/recycled. The details of the
destination for the major waste categories,
which contributed to more than 85% of the
total non-hazardous waste generated in ITC
units in 2014-15, are given below:

Non-hazardous
waste category

Generated by

Quantity
of
generation
(Tonnes)

Fly ash generated from
coal-fired boilers

Units of Paperboards & Specialty Papers
and Leaf Tobacco Businesses

3,98,369

Used by cement and brick
manufacturers

Lime sludge

Bhadrachalam and Tribeni Units of
Paperboards & Specialty Papers Business

2,07,466

Utilised in-house as well as by
external cement manufactures

Bottom ash from
coal-fired boilers

Units of Paperboards & Specialty Papers
and Leaf Tobacco Businesses

51,091

Used for brick manufacturing
and filling of low-lying areas

Wood waste from
chipping operation

Bhadrachalam Unit of Paperboards &
Specialty Papers Business

24,517

Used as a fuel in an
in-house boiler

Waste destination

Environmental
Performance

Waste Recycling
ITC strives to maximise resource efficiency in
all its Units so as to reduce waste generation
to the extent possible. Since generation of
waste cannot be completely eliminated due
to limitations in processes and technology,
all ITC Businesses/Units endeavour to
work towards 100% recycling of generated

waste. Approach of ‘segregation at source’
along with focused attention on identifying
and tracking of all waste streams till its
final disposal have helped to enhance the
performance in waste recycling across
all Units. During 2014-15, 99.8% of the
total waste generated within the units was
recycled.

Progress on Waste Recycling

900
99.8

800

99.9

99.8

100.0%

99.9

99.8

99.8

99.8%

700

99.6%

600

99.4%

500

99.2%

400

98.9

490

579

638

663

682

712

791

100

98.8%

353

300
200

99.0%

99.8

2007-08

2008-09

2009-10

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

0

98.6%
98.4%
98.2%

Total Waste Generation (kilo tonnes)

Waste Recycling %

Units that recycled more than 99% of generated waste:

Cigarette factories at Bengaluru,
Munger, Saharanpur, Kolkata and Pune.

Leaf Tobacco processing Units at
Anaparti, Chirala and Mysuru.

Paperboards and Specialty Papers
Units at Bhadrachalam, Kovai and
Bollaram.

ILTD Divisional Head Office in Guntur.

Personal Care Business Unit at Haridwar.

ITC Green Centre at Gurgaon.

Foods Business Units at Haridwar
(Snacks and Biscuits) and Pune
(Snacks).

Hotels: ITC Maurya, ITC Maratha,
ITC Grand Central, ITC Windsor, ITC
Mughal, ITC Gardenia, ITC Grand
Chola, ITC Sonar, ITC Rajputana, ITC
Kakatiya, My Fortune Chennai and
WelcomHotel Sheraton New Delhi.

ITC Life Sciences and Technology
Centre at Bengaluru.

113

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Waste Used as Raw Materials
Use of post-consumer waste as raw materials
by the Paperboards and Specialty Paper Units
at Kovai and Bhadrachalam has enabled
the Company to further expand its waste
recycling footprint. Efforts at ITC Units to
recycle the entire waste generated along
with utilisation of externally generated
waste paper as a source of fibre in the above
mentioned Paperboards and Specialty Paper
Units, have helped the company to maintain
its solid waste recycling positive status for the
8th consecutive year (refer the table below).
“Wealth Out of Waste” (WOW), a recycling
programme initiated in April 2007 by the
Paperboards & Specialty Papers Business
of ITC, has evolved into a corporate level
2007-08 2008-09

programme with scope enhanced to “Wellbeing out of Waste” focused on creating
scalable solutions for spreading awareness
about recycling, encouraging people to
segregate & dispose waste responsibly and
creating sustainable livelihoods for people
working as rag-pickers.
As part of ITC’s ongoing efforts towards
maximising value capture from postconsumer waste, a pilot project on recycled
compact boards made out of packaging
waste has led to the development of school
furniture which have been deployed in
schools supported by ITC. Applications for
these boards within ITC facilities are also
being explored. In addition, studies are being
carried out to explore viability of converting
waste plastic to fuel.

2009-10

2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14

2014-15
#

Total waste generated (tonnes) 3,52,970

4,90,180

5,78,865

6,38,405 6,63,796 6,82,405 7,11,887

7,91,227

Waste recycled (tonnes)®

3,49,264

4,84,287

5,77,766

6,37,452 6,62,978 6,81,129 7,11,033

7,89,720

% Recycled

98.90

98.80

99.80

99.80

99.90

99.80

99.90

99.80

Un-recycled waste (tonnes)

3,706

5,893

1,099

953

818

1,276

854

1,592

External wastes used as raw
materials (tonnes)

1,63,245

1,25,337

1,25,931

145

124

122

Waste recycling footprint (%)*

1,19,002 1,15,414 1,18,462 1,09,998
119

117

117

# 85 Tonnes of waste, carried over from previous year was disposed in 2014-15 but not included in ‘total waste generated’
* Waste Recycling footprint (%) = (Waste recycled + external waste used as raw material)*100/Total waste generated in ITC
® Waste recycled include 8,891 tonnes of waste composted

114

115

1,14,563
114

Environmental
Performance

Waste from
Supply Chain
In 2013-14, ITC started accounting for
the waste generated from the operations
of exclusive third party manufacturing
(TPM) Units catering to the notebook
segment of ITC’s Education and Stationery
Product Business as well as ATC Limited,
ITC’s associate company. To expand this
coverage, this year TPM Units for Cigarette
Business have also been included in the
reporting boundary. Performance of these
Units is detailed below. ITC will continue to
progressively extend this coverage. Quality
of data continues to be a challenge in the
TPM facilities. Capacity building and regular
review of performance data will be continued
so as to improve the data quality in the
coming years.
Total Waste Generated
(tonnes)

% Recycled

Exclusive TPM Units for
Notebook segment

3,879

95.3

Exclusive TPM Units for
Cigarette Business

1,201

99.3

752

99.9

Supply Chain Members

ATC Limited

The Road Ahead
Continue to focus on reducing the waste generation in the Units and work
towards 100% reuse/recycle of the generated waste with regular monitoring of
key performance indicators against set targets.
LCA studies for identified products/services to evaluate the opportunities for
improvement and enhance the resource efficiency in value chain.
Expansion of Well-being out of Waste (WOW) programme to promote reducereuse-recycle approach at households as well as develop formal structures to
encourage sustainable livelihoods for the rag-pickers.
Analysis of techno-commercial feasibility of in-house use of post-consumer
waste collected through WOW programme.
l	
l	

Fuel for energy generation.
Compact boards, made of packaging waste, to be used for construction purpose.

A pilot project on
recycled compact
boards made
out of packaging
waste has led to
the development
of school furniture
which have been
deployed in schools
supported by ITC

115

Raw
Materials

Management
Approach
All ITC Units continue to pursue efficient use
of natural resources through extensive process
management initiatives focused on waste
elimination/reduction. Moreover, as most of
ITC’s businesses are vertically integrated, this
provides the Company unique opportunities
for exercising greater control over waste
minimisation. Such integration facilitates
optimum utilisation of raw materials, recycling/
reuse of wastes as well as efficient logistics.

For addressing the impacts outside the
boundary of operations, life cycle assessment
study of ITC’s products are progressively
being taken up with the objective of making
such studies an integral part of product
design and development. In addition, Board
approved policies of ITC supplemented
by a ‘Code of Conduct for Vendors and
Service providers’ provide the direction for
sustainable sourcing of raw materials to
ensure their long-term availability. Please
refer to “Supply Chain” section of this Report
for further details.

117

Sustainable
Livelihoods

ITC’s
Sustainability
Policies
Addressing these
Challenges

Challenges
from Materials
Sustainability

	
Increased competition for resources,
technology barriers, need for capital
investments and maintaining cost
competitiveness.

	Maximise resource use efficiency through
rigorous process controls.

l

l

	
Life cycle assessment studies for
identifying broad areas for improvements
as well as building internal competencies
and expand these studies to all other
products and services (Please refer to
“Supply Chain” section of this Report for
further details).

l

	 Due to absence of adequate infrastructural
support, any significant disruption in
rainfall patterns resulting from climate
change may lead to considerable adverse
impacts on agricultural yields.

l

	 Climate change aggravates the risks of low
productivity of agricultural sector of India,
impacting sustainability of agri based
businesses.

l

	 Focusing on long term sustainability goals
while operating in an environment where
both market dynamics as well as regulatory
framework is focused on the short term.

l

	
Low productivity as an outcome of
increasingly small farm-plot holdings,
inadequate access of farmers to knowledge
and technology.

l

Policy on
Environment,
Health and Safety
Policy on
Life-cycle
Sustainability

	 Agricultural procurement and sourcing
policies in India come from a controlled market
philosophy shaped by circumstances of postindependence in India. For a new India, where
agri-productivity has to be maximised while
also ensuring social equity, a new framework
of laws and regulations is necessary.
	 Furthermore, absence of crop and weather
insurance reduce the risk-taking capability
of the small farmers for investment in
infrastructure improvement.

l

118

	Ensuring the sustainability of agriculture
through integrated watershed development
projects including rainwater harvesting
and soil and moisture conservation
projects particularly in regions where ITC
sources its raw materials from.

l

	Grassroots capacity building for proper
governance in agricultural water usage,
self-sustenance of integrated watershed
development programmes, infrastructure
improvement etc. (Please refer to “Social
Investments – Mission Sunehra Kal” of this
Report for further details).

l

Policy on
Responsible
Sourcing

l

Within Boundary

ITC
Strategy

Beyond Boundary

	ITC, through industry associations, and
other appropriate forums engages with
policy makers to discuss these issues.

l

Environmental
Performance

ITC’s Performance
ITC’s products and services can be broadly
classified into the following categories:

1.	 FMCG (B to C) Products
Cigarettes, Branded Packaged Foods,
Personal Care Products, Education
and Stationery Products, Matches and
Agarbattis.

2.	 INDUSTRIAL SUPPLIES AND
EXPORTS
Paper, Paperboards, Packaging, Leaf
Tobacco, etc.

3.	SERVICES
Hoteliering and Information Technology.
A very significant proportion of raw
materials in ITC businesses are sourced from
agricultural farms and plantations. In 201415, ITC processed over 27,50,000 tonnes
of materials, out of which 97% were from
agricultural farms and plantations which
are renewable. 58% of this renewable raw

materials was sourced by Paperboards and
Specialty Papers Business (ITC’s initiatives
in promoting sustainable social and farm
forestry plantations have been detailed in
“Social Investments: Mission Sunehra Kal”
section). Another 34% of the renewable raw
materials was procured by the Foods and
Agri Businesses. Sustainability aspects in the
supply chain of these businesses have been
detailed in the “Supply Chain” and “Product
Responsibility” sections of this Report.
Green leaf tobacco which constitutes around
8% of the total renewable raw materials is
procured by the Leaf Tobacco Division of ITC
from tobacco auction platforms. This Division
also works on the social and environmental
performance of its leaf tobacco supply
chain through the Social Responsibility in
Tobacco Production (SRTP) programme,
performance of which is monitored by AB
Sustain, an independent third party reviewer.
The uniqueness of this programme is that
it covers all aspects of the tobacco leaf
value chain which ensures best practices in
tobacco farming and processing.

119

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Responsible Sourcing of
Wood Fibre
Wood is a major source of fibre for the paper
and paperboards industry. Availability of
wood remains a critical challenge and is a
serious sustainability concern, especially in
a country with limited natural resources and
acute income inequities.

As most of ITC’s
businesses
are vertically
integrated, this
provides the
Company unique
opportunities for
exercising greater
control over waste
minimisation

120

Approximately 48% of the total fibre
requirements of ITC’s Paperboards and
Specialty Papers Division is met by the pulp
manufactured at Bhadrachalam, another 22%
comes from recycled fibre, processed at
Kovai and Bhadrachalam, and the balance
30% is imported pulp used at Bhadrachalam
and Tribeni Units. Approximately 74% of
fibre manufactured in Bhadrachalam is from
wood sourced from ITC’s social and farm
forestry initiatives. Majority of fibre used for
operations at the Kovai Unit is from recycled
fibre and ITC confirms that 100% of wood
and recycled fibre used by ITC’s Paperboards
and Specialty Papers Business is of known
and legal origin. In-house R&D has developed
high yielding, site specific, disease resistant
eucalyptus and subabul clones on the
back of extensive knowledge of plantation
management practices. ITC distributed
167.18 million high quality saplings to
farmers which resulted in increasing the

area under social and farm forestry by 29,933
hectares in 2014-15.
Apart from the obvious benefits of increasing
the green cover, plantation on degradable
wastelands under the social forestry
programme, also directly contributes to in
situ moisture conservation, ground water
recharge and significant reduction in topsoil
losses caused by wind and water erosion. In
addition, as a result of the leaf litter from
multi-species plantations and the promotion
of leguminous intercrops, soils are constantly
enriched.

Forest Stewardship Council
Certifications
Further consolidating ITC’s Triple Bottom
Line performance, the four units of ITC’s
Paperboards and Specialty Papers Division
i.e. Bhadrachalam, Bollaram, Kovai and
Tribeni, received the prestigious ‘Forest
Stewardship Council (FSC) Chain of Custody’
Certification in 2009 and have retained
the same during the current year also. To
ensure responsible wood all domestic wood
procurement sources have been certified as
per standards of FSC-Controlled Wood.
The FSC is an independent, nongovernmental, not-for-profit organisation
established to promote the responsible

Environmental
Performance
management of the world’s forests and is
recognised as the gold standard in wood
certification for ethical and legal sourcing.
The FSC is represented in more than 107
countries around the world, and is the most
widely accepted and respected amongst
forest product certification schemes.
FSC endorsement implies that an
organisation complies with its principles
and criteria in the different areas of its
functioning. ITC’s Paper and Paperboards
Division can supply FSC certified paper/
paperboards from all its four manufacturing
Units under the categories of ‘FSC Mixed’ or
‘FSC Recycled’. FSC logo on products assures
customers that the products/packaging is
from legal, sustainable and well managed
sources.
The FSC certification for ITC’s Paperboards
and Specialty Papers Units exemplifies the

organisation’s continued commitment to
sustainable business practices and to the
building of an inclusive and secure future for
both its stakeholders and society at large.

The Road Ahead
In the coming years, ITC plans to carry
out more life cycle assessment studies
of products/services to evaluate the
environmental impact at various life cycle
stages, which would help in identifying
opportunities for further improving their
environmental attributes. In line with the
Board approved Policies on Life Cycle
Sustainability and Responsible Sourcing,
formal systems and procedures will be
progressively implemented across ITC
Businesses.

All four units of
ITC’s Paperboards
and Specialty
Papers Division
(Bhadrachalam,
Bollaram, Kovai and
Tribeni) received
the prestigious
‘Forest Stewardship
Council (FSC)
Chain of Custody’
Certification in
2009 and have
retained the same
during the current
year also

121

Biodiversity

Management
Approach
Given the essential eco-system services
that biodiversity areas provide, especially
to rural households, ITC recognises that its
preservation and nurture is crucial for the longterm sustainability of farming communities.
ITC has, accordingly, implemented several
initiatives in its operational areas for the in
situ revival and nurture of native flora and
fauna. This will not only preserve the nation’s
rich biodiversity, but also ensure a sustainable
future for communities residing in the
Company’s catchment areas.

Biodiversity
Conservation in
Agriculture
For the second consecutive year, ITC’s
Agri Business Division has partnered with

reputed international organisations like
EarthWatch Institute, UK to implement
the Biodiversity Risk and Opportunity
Assessment Tool (BROA) in its crop growing
regions. This tool identifies impacts and
dependencies of business operations on
the biodiversity of identified agricultural
landscapes, and in the assessment of
various risks and opportunities. The BROA
tool has been implemented in Karnataka
(Mysuru District) and Andhra Pradesh (West
Godavari, Nellore, Prakasam and Guntur
Districts) covering 5 landscapes till date.
An article on this initiative was published
in the International Journal of Biodiversity
& Endangered Species, Spain 2014. The
article also featured as a case study in
the India Business & Biodiversity Initiative
(IBBI) report published by the CII-ITC Centre
of Excellence for Sustainable Development
and the Ministry of Environment, Forest &
Climate Change.

123

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Biodioversity Parks
in Social Forestry
The objective of this initiative is to revive and
enhance native floral and faunal biodiversity
and in the process, promote livelihood and
employment generation for poor tribal
households. In the past two years, ITC has
developed a mosaic of 11 biodiversity plots
involving farmers and community members
covering a total area of 22 hectares in
Khammam district of Telangana and East
Godavari, West Godavari and Visakhapatnam
districts of Andhra Pradesh. In Karnataka, 2
biodiversity plots were promoted in Mysuru
where 523 native species were planted
on 3 hectares. The plots were established
in collaboration with Tank User Groups.
Preference was given to native species in the
implementation of this initiative.
In a unique collaboration, ITC is providing
assistance to the Telangana Government
to strengthen and benchmark biodiversity
conservation in Kasu Brahmananda Reddy
(KBR) National Park, which covers an area
of 140 hectares in Hyderabad. Activities
include identification of high conservation
value forests (HCVF) and of rare, threatened
and endangered species; initiating specific
conservation measures for flagship species

Cumulatively,
the area under
biodiversity now
stands at 3,191
hectares

124

and introducing biodiversity indexing. This
partnership has led to FSC certification of
KBR National Park.

Revival of
Commons as
Biodiversity
Conservation Plots
The maintenance and regeneration of
common pasturelands assume critical
significance for rural communities. Livestock
is not only a means to a secondary income,
but also a safety net, especially in times of
hardship like drought or floods. However
changes in land use and the ‘Tragedy of the
Commons’, have put these pasturelands
in constant threat of encroachment and
degradation, thereby adversely affecting
the communities dependant on them. ITC’s
watershed development programme in
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra
has led to the revival of biodiversity in such
commons. This initiative was scaled up to 57
plots covering 504 hectares during 2014-15
with the objective of protecting native flora
and fauna and providing other eco-system
services. Cumulatively, the area under
biodiversity now stands at 3,191 hectares.

Environmental
Performance

The Road Ahead
In ITC’s efforts to spearhead biodiversity
conservation, the Company will continue
to develop local stewardship through
awareness
programmes,
sustainable
practices in agriculture, afforestation,
pisciculture, apiculture, medicinal plants
and creating sustainable livelihood for
tribal farmers.
Going forward, some of the specific plans
include the following:
	 Based on the results of the BROA study
in agricultural landscapes, ITC will
progressively delineate a biodiversity
strategy by combining biodiversity
conservation and improvement with
prevention, management and remediation
of damage to natural habitats (if any).

l

	
Tank
cascade-based
biodiversity
assessment was taken up in Ravndoor
village of Mysuru district with technical
support of Kalpataruvu, a non-profit
organisation, and Forestry College,
Ponnampet (Karnataka). A cascade
system is formed by interlinked tanks
where the surplus run-off of upper tanks is
a source of water for the lower tanks. The
final report is under preparation, which
will form the basis for an implementation
plan across the entire tank cascade in
the project area and provide a template

l

for its replication in other project areas
predominantly irrigated by tanks.
	 Discussions are on with several expert
agencies, including the International
Union for Conservation of Nature
(IUCN) to establish baselines, undertake
impact
assessment
and
prepare
management plans in some of ITC’s agri
business areas. Working plans based
on these assessments will be ready by
December 2015.

l

	 Mapping of wastelands of panchayat,
individual farmers and foreshores of
seasonal streams was taken up in 16
villages of Sehore district (Madhya
Pradesh) to develop a template for
biodiversity
conservation
through
afforestation. The exercise identified
an average area of 11 hectares of
wasteland in each village for biodiversity
development, which will be taken up in a
phased manner in the coming years.

l

	 To develop plans for revival of commons
like village pastures and revenue
wastelands in Mandsaur district (Madhya
Pradesh), Foundation for Ecological
Security (FES), a non-profit organisation,
was engaged as a resource agency for
collection of baseline and impact data.
FES is also undertaking a similar baseline
survey of biodiversity plots in Jhalawar
district (Rajasthan). These studies will be
able to help ITC in tracking progress on
revival of native flora and fauna.

l

ITC has
implemented
several initiatives
in its operational
areas for the in situ
revival and nurture
of native flora and
fauna

125

Social
Performance

Labour Practices &
Decent Work and
Human Rights
Occupational Health
& Safety

Social Investments Mission Sunehra Kal

Product Responsibility

Labour Practices
& Decent Work
and Human Rights

Management
Approach
ITC operates in a diversified, ever-changing,
highly competitive global landscape. This
in turn necessitates the development of a
strong, customer responsive world-class
enterprise premised on a commitment to
employee well-being that goes beyond
just conforming with relevant local laws to
complying with global standards.
ITC is committed to conducting business
in a manner that reflects its high ethical
standards. It expects its employees and
business partners to subscribe and adhere to
this philosophy, which honours all pertinent
laws and upholds the spirit of human rights as
enshrined in existing international standards.

Objectives
The Company’s primary objectives in this area
for the next five years are to ensure that:
	All ITC’s operational units are and will
remain fully compliant with the Company’s
policies, premised on a zero tolerance
guiding principle towards such violations.

l

	All investment decisions will integrate
Human Rights and Decent Labour
Practices considerations into the decisionmaking process.

l

	All ITC’s business partners and supply
chain members will follow and adhere
to the Human Rights policies that the
Company upholds.

l

Accordingly, the Company has put in place
Board approved policies covering crucial
aspects of employee engagement and
human rights.

Implementation
All ITC Units have appropriate systems and
processes in place to ensure compliance
with these Policies and with statutory
provisions, including processes to redress
grievances. The implementation of these
policies is ensured by Divisional/SBU
Chief Executives, through members of
the respective Management Committees.
Compliance is regularly monitored and
evaluated by the Sustainability Compliance
Review Committee (SCRC). The report of
the SCRC is reviewed by the Corporate
Management Committee every quarter.

Outcomes
ITC’s commitment to its employees and their
well-being is reflected in its compliance
with all its stated policies, evident from
the data on performance presented later in
the report.

129

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Leadership
development
is considered
integral to talent
management.
The ‘strategy of
organisation’
serves as an
excellent platform
to build distributed
business leadership

Human Resource
Strategy

Building Business
Leaders

In order to sustain its position amongst
India’s most valuable corporations, ITC
remains relentlessly customer-focused,
competition-differentiated,
performancedriven and future-capable. Preparing ITC
for the future requires, amongst several
steps, building today’s capabilities to enable
the best response to tomorrow’s market
opportunities. Five capability platforms
have been identified – Strategic, Value
Chain, Leadership, Innovation and Human
Resources Development – that are relevant
to make businesses future ready. In addition,
these platforms are designed to strengthen
organisational systems to facilitate speedy
and competitively superior responses to
market opportunities.

The talent management programme of the
Company strives to deliver its unique talent
promise of ‘Building Winning Businesses.
Building Business Leaders. Creating
Value for India.’ ITC is guided by a holistic
approach, centred on the multiple elements
of talent sourcing, work design, performance
management and remuneration, individual
growth and development related to talent
management, rather than individual
elements that impact talent. Leadership
development is considered integral to talent
management. The ‘strategy of organisation’
serves as an excellent platform to build
distributed business leadership. Another
important dimension of building leadership
is the organisation’s strategic learning and
development agenda.

ITC follows two approaches to build critical
capabilities in the identified areas. One
is energising the organisation for change
by building capability in people through
information, knowledge and skills to exhibit
appropriate behaviours. The second approach is
to guide learning and continuous performance
improvement in functions and businesses.

130

Renewed investments have been made
to enhance ITC’s skills in recruitment and
selection and performance management
processes. These investments will have a
positive impact on the Company’s talent
management programme.

Social
Performance

Performance
Awareness & Sensitisation

During the year, employee relations were
handled well and there was no stoppage of
work for any reason whatsoever in any of
ITC’s units.

Specific actions were undertaken during
the year to ensure compliance with policies
on human rights and labour practices.
These include:
	Sensitisation training on ITC’s approach
to Human Rights and on Prevention of
sexual harassment was done to cover 728
employees across businesses.

l

	
Training of the Internal Complaints
Committee members (38 employees) took
place under the Sexual Harassment of
Women at Workplace Act, 2013.

l

	
Roll-out of the Grievance Redressal
Procedure for all managers and office
associates in ITC’s businesses and
Corporate Head Office.

l

	Awareness building amongst vendors and
service providers, through the introduction
of a Code of Conduct on this aspect, which
has been accepted by identified vendors/
service providers.

l

Employees
During the year under report, the number
of full-time direct employees was 32,115 of
which 2,202 employees in the Leaf Tobacco
business were engaged on a seasonal basis
due to the nature of the business. Of the
total number of employees, 3,414 were
women. The number of new appointees for
the reporting period was 5,225 of which
21% were women.
In addition, 19,963 employees of service
providers were engaged during the period.
12,658 direct employees are members of
various unions. The Company continued to
invest in progressive employee relations
characterised by the core principles
of trusteeship, fairness and equity,
industrial democracy and partnership with
enlightened trade unions, which has stood
the test of time. ITC continued to set a fine
record of industrial harmony, highlighted
not merely by the absence of strife, but
by the more positive outcome of effective
performance in terms of high productivity
and superior quality.

Employee Well Being
Nurturing quality talent and caring for the
well-being of employees are an integral part
of ITC’s work culture. This approach focuses
on creating a conducive work environment
that helps deliver winning performance.
Benefits such as periodic preventive health
check-ups, medical assistance (including
hospitalisation), group accident insurance
scheme, annual leave along with leave
encashment and retirement benefits,
amongst others, are provided to permanent
employees of ITC.
During the year under review, 135 employees
applied and were given maternity leave,
of whom 111 have returned to work while
24 are still on leave.
ITC’s businesses have promoted various
interventions comprising (a) employee
contests to generate innovative ideas; and
(b) communication and “connect” processes,
like town-hall meetings, local intranets,
fun@work events and business specific
rewards and recognition programmes to
drive employee engagement and well-being.

131

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Attrition
ITC has ensured attraction and retention
of quality employees, a result of its talent
management strategy of offering diverse
experiences and challenges across varied
business contexts, investments in the
development and growth of employees, as
well as a market driven and competitive
remuneration philosophy. The overall attrition
(comprising voluntary separation, retirement,
termination and abandonment of services)
in the Company, including ITC Infotech,
across management and non-management
employees for 2014-15 was 16%. The attrition
for management level employees was 18%,
wherein ITC Infotech accounted for 11%
(largely due to the nature of the industry),
while the rest of ITC accounted for 7%. The
attrition for non-management employees
was 15%, of which ITC Hotels accounted for
9% of the total. Gender-wise attrition was at
15% and 32% for male and female employees
respectively. Efforts are being made to identify
the key dissonance factors leading to high
attrition of female employees in ITC Infotech
and ITC Hotels.

Diversity and Equal
Opportunity
ITC believes that diversity at the workplace
positively impacts work performance
and work environment through superior
consumer-centricity, innovative ideas and
better employee engagement. ITC’s policy
on Diversity and Equal opportunity (please
refer to Policies on ITC’s Corporate website
www.itcportal.com) and its implementation
is focused on fostering meritocracy in the
organisation, which promotes diversity and
offers equal opportunity to all employees.

The intent is to ensure that there is no
discrimination in compensation, training and
employee benefits, based on caste, religion,
disability, gender, sexual orientation, race,
colour, ancestry, marital status or affiliation
with a political, religious or union organisation
or majority/minority group. Given the sociocultural diversity of our country, ITC’s
recruitment and selection processes are
geared towards enabling representation from
across regions, ethnicities, religions and
different social strata.
The culture of the Company ensures that
aspects of work-life balance for employees,
especially for women, are suitably addressed.
ITC demands, demonstrates and promotes
professional behaviour and treats all
employees with equal respect. In this regard,
ITC has put in place suitable processes
and mechanisms to ensure issues such as
sexual harassment, if any, are effectively
addressed. During the year, five complaints
of sexual harassment were received, all of
which have since been resolved.
ITC encourages local employment in its
manufacturing units and hotels, depending
on the availability of requisite skills. In some
of its Units, ITC also partners with local
Industrial Training Institutes to provide
vital inputs to the management of these
institutions. ITC has also partnered with
National Skill Development Corporation
(NSDC) empanelled agencies to impart
market linked vocational training on skills
including sales & distribution, hospitality,
electrical maintenance, automobile repairs,
beautician and garment manufacturing with
the objective of enhancing employability
of youth from disadvantaged sections of
society. During 2014-15, over 13,000
students were enrolled in Company
promoted vocational training programmes
of which 36% were women and 40% were
SC/ST candidates. A large number of youth
is also provided with apprentice training
opportunities at ITC manufacturing units.
Although ITC is committed to employing
youth from disadvantaged communities,
it has enlarged its impact by increasing
the talent pool of youth from these
communities by equipping them with
the necessary skills or qualifications to

132

Social
Performance

make them more employable in the formal
sectors of the economy. ITC also lays equal
emphasis on strengthening the economic
portfolio of poor households belonging to
marginalised groups through initiatives
aimed at natural resource management
and creation of off-farm opportunities to
create sustainable livelihoods.
The affirmative action initiatives of the
Company have had a direct and tangible
impact on the lives of 55,061 Scheduled
Caste/Scheduled Tribe beneficiaries spread
over 14 states of the country during the year.

Learning and Development
ITC’s Capability Development Agenda flows
from its Vision, Mission, Strategic Agenda and
the 3-Horizon Growth strategy. All Learning
and Development initiatives offered during
2014-15 were aligned to this agenda.
ITC has a multi-pronged approach to
learning, with focussed interventions in core
and functional areas, customised businessspecific and organisation-wide strategic
interventions, as well as three-tiered
leadership development programmes. Based
on the premise that action learning will lead

to better skill development, the programmes
stress less on classroom learning and more
on work place projects and demonstrated
leadership behaviours on the job. The
programmes are thus long term journeys
rather than short term events.
Multiple forums for learning include
classroom training, on-the-job training,
inclusion in taskforces and projects,
mentoring and deploying of organisationwide portals to enable sharing of best
practices.
Employee training at the factory level
focusses on continuous skill upgradation
on the basis of skill-gap assessment and
planned technology induction. In 2014-15,
1,42,547 person-days of formal training
were organised for employees at various
levels. In addition, on-the-job learning
opportunities were provided to a cross
section of employees supported by inputs
from peers and superiors.
ITC’s Performance Management System
also plays a pivotal role in charting out the
development agenda of employees in the
management cadre. In 2014-15 all eligible
managers underwent performance reviews.

ITC’s Capability
Development
Agenda flows from
its Vision, Mission,
Strategic Agenda
and the 3-Horizon
Growth strategy

133

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Human Rights
Human Rights Significant
Investments
During 2014-15, nearly `892 crores out of
a total capex cash-flow of `3,008 crores
was incurred on machinery and technology,
sourced from reputed global suppliers/vendors.
Approximately `699 crores were invested on
new factories, hotels and modernisations.
All large contracts in ITC for the construction
of hotels, factories, and significant upgrades,
have incorporated environment, health,
safety and human rights clauses covering
decent place of work and beyond compliance
labour practices.
All large projects were managed and
supervised by ITC managers, who also
ensured compliance to relevant laws.
Systems have been established to ensure
compliance of ITC’s Policies and Standards,
through audits by Corporate Internal Audit
and Corporate EHS.

Human Rights: Supply Chain
As a large multi-business enterprise with
products that are benchmarked nationally

134

and internationally, ITC recognises its
responsibility to proactively encourage high
standards of ‘Human Rights’ across its supply
chain. The Company’s approach to managing
Human Rights in the following distinct
categories is described below:
	ITC’s businesses are vertically integrated
across several Divisions, all of which ensure
adherence to ITC Human Rights policies.

l

	ITC procures inputs for the Company’s
agri-based businesses entirely from state
controlled trading platforms and the open
market. The process is designed to ensure
transparency and best prices for even small
and marginal farmers.

l

	ITC ensures adherence to its Policy on
Human Rights, Labour Practices and Decent
Work Environment for all its employees and
for all service providers operating within its
establishments. ITC has zero tolerance for
non-compliance in this area.

l

	In order to ensure a high degree of
awareness and to reiterate ITC’s focus on
Human Rights and EHS in its extended
supply chain, as a first step, the ITC code of
conduct for vendors and service providers
has been shared with supply chain partners
and accepted by identified vendors/
service providers.

l

Social
Performance

During 2014-15, the total number of service
providers was 2,092 of which 1,635 operated
within the Company’s premises and 457
worked off-site. 100% of these service
providers include Human Rights Policies and
EHS guidelines in their service contracts.
No contracts were cancelled during the year
as a result of non-compliance with ITC’s
Human Rights Policy.

Freedom of Association
During 2014-15, no incidents of violation
of Freedom of Association were reported
either at the concerned units or to statutory
authorities. Within ITC’s operations, there
are no areas that present risks to the right
to exercise Freedom of Association and
Collective Bargaining.

Prohibiting Child Labour and
Preventing Forced Labour at
Workplace
During 2014-15, there were no incidents
of child labour or forced labour within ITC
establishments. The process of strengthening

systems to educate, mandate and thereafter
track adherence to ITC’s Policy on Human
Rights in the Supply Chain has started with the
sharing of the ITC Code of Conduct for vendors
and service providers. This process should be
well established over the next five years with
the inclusion of random social audits of a few
ITC supply chain members every year.

Grievance Redressal Process
A Grievance Redressal Procedure for nonunionised employees has been implemented
to address concerns of internal stakeholders
pertaining to Labour Practices and Human
Rights violations. Aspects of employment
including compensation, working hours,
disciplinary practices, maternity protection,
occupational health & safety, training &
education, diversity & equal opportunity,
equal remuneration for men and women as
well as concerns in the area of Human Rights,
if any will be addressed with this mechanism.
During the year, 197 grievances were received
from workmen on matters pertaining to
welfare, facilities and administration and
173 of them have since been resolved.

ITC ensures
adherence to its
Policy on Human
Rights, Labour
Practices and
Decent Work
Environment for
all its employees
and for all
service providers
operating within its
establishments

135

Occupational
Health and
Safety

ITC believes its workforce is a key asset
contributing to the Company’s long term
standing as one of India’s most admired
organisations. The Company believes that
a safe and healthy work environment is a
basic requirement for ensuring employee
well-being and that best practices in
occupational health & safety enhance the
Company’s overall performance. This helps
in attracting and retaining quality talent,
and enhances the equity of the Company as
a responsible Corporate.

The ITC Approach
ITC’s approach towards best-in-class
occupational health and safety standards is
articulated in the Board approved EHS Policy
that emphasises on continual improvement
and is based on an environment, health
and safety (EHS) management system
developed in accordance with internationally
recognised standards, supported by
continued investments in state-of-the-art
technology and quality human resources.
As a first step, EHS requirements are
integrated at the design stage itself for all
new investments in the built environment.
The design reviews cover building &
structural stability, fire & life safety
measures, electrical systems, segregation
of man-material movements, work place
lighting, ventilation & hygiene requirements,
noise & dust controls, water and energy use
optimisation, traffic safety, etc. The process
of incorporating EHS at the design stage not
only helps in eliminating/reducing hazards
but also optimises the overall infrastructure
as well as operational costs.
As a next step, compliance with EHS
standards during the construction phase
is ensured by implementing appropriate
project EHS management systems. This
includes adequate training of all employees
including service providers’ employees,
enforcement of the use of safe equipment/
tools/tackles, development of and adherence
to safe work procedures/method statements,
observance of good housekeeping & storage
practices and usage of personal protective
equipment. Pre-commissioning audits of all
large projects are carried out by Corporate
EHS (CEHS) to ensure that all equipment and

systems have been procured and installed in
conformance with agreed standards and a
formal clearance is required to be provided
before the project can be operationalised.
At the operational stage, all ITC factories,
hotels, warehouses and offices have
established EHS management systems
with designated roles and responsibilities
and competent resources to comply with
Corporate EHS Guidelines. These guidelines
also require raising of awareness amongst
employees, their families and surrounding
communities regarding off-the-job safety
aspects such as home safety, safe use of
LPG in kitchen, HIV/AIDs, hepatitis, dengue,
malaria and road safety. As part of ITC’s
preventive medical programme, various
categories of employees based on their
age and exposure to occupational hazards,
undergo periodic medical check-ups.

Compliance is monitored through internal
audits by CEHS across ITC establishments
on a periodic basis and forms part of the
report back to CMC (monthly) and the
Board (quarterly), together with accident
statistics, their investigation and subsequent
closure. In addition, Business units adhere
to international standards such as OHSAS
18001 and ISO 14001.
The EHS resources of the Divisions provide
the support necessary to ensure proper
implementation of the ITC EHS policy,
while the Unit Heads and the Divisional
Management Committees are responsible
and accountable for ensuring compliance.
The CEHS function is responsible for
reviewing and updating standards and
guidelines on EHS policies, for providing
guidance and support to all concerned
and for monitoring compliance at the
corporate level.

137

Sustainable
Livelihoods

On-site Safety
Performance

reduction (81%) in LTA although the
number of Units and manpower engaged,
have gone up manifold. This is attributable
to a sound engineering approach and
strong management ownership coupled
with targeted interventions like behaviour
based safety initiatives and tailor made risk
assessment programmes at select units.
These have contributed towards 2014-15
being a zero fatality year.

ITC Employees
In 2014-15 the number of on-site Lost Time
Accidents (LTA) for ITC employees was 7 (against
10 in 2013-14), as depicted below. Since
2004-05, there has been a significant
Lost Time Accidents (LTA)

40

37

35
30
25

23

20

20

16

15

16

15

14

12

10

10

7

7

5
2004
-05

2005
-06

2006
-07

2007
-08

2008
-09

2009
-10

2010
-11

2011
-12

2012
-13

2013
-14

2014
-15

LTA - An accident where the injured does not return to work in the next scheduled shift.

Lost day rate, defined as the number of days lost due to accidents for every 2,00,000 person
hours worked, over the years is depicted below:
Lost Day Rate - ITC Employees

28.4*
25.3*

30
25
20
15
6.5

10

5.53**
2.2

3.5

3.1

2.2

1.9

1.1

5

EHS requirements
are integrated at
the design stage
itself for all new
investments in the
built environment
138

0
2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
* Increase in lost day rate in 2009-10 & 2011-12 attributable to one fatal accident in each of the years, wherein
a loss of 6000 man-days is required to be accounted for as per IS 3786:1983.
** Increase in comparison to 2013-14, due to an accident wherein the injured suffered amputation of the right
thumb for which a loss of 1800 man-days is required to be accounted for as per IS 3786:1983.

Social
Performance

Injury rate, defined as the frequency of injuries in relation to total time worked also shows a
significant improvement. Since 2004-05, there has been a substantial reduction in the injury
rate from 0.21 to 0.02 in 2014-15 (an improvement of 90.5%).
Injury Rate (IR)

0.25

0.21

0.2
0.09

0.15

0.09
0.08

0.09
0.06

0.1

0.05

0.06
0.03

0.02

0.05

0.02

0
2004
-05

2005
-06

2006
-07

2007
-08

2008
-09

Employees of Service Providers
All vendors and service providers within ITC
premises are required to follow the same
EHS systems applicable to the Company’s
employees. All employees of service providers
also undergo adequate generic as well as jobspecific training for safe work procedures
and regular briefings and tool box talks have

2009
-10

2010
-11

2011
-12

2012
-13

2013
-14

2014
-15

been made an integral part of ITC’s safety
management system. In addition, service
providers’ employees are also an integral
part of the customised risk assessment
training programme, rolled out at several
Units, to enhance their understanding of risk
identification & mitigation.
Since 2012-13, ITC has started reporting
on the safety performance of its service

All vendors and
service providers
within ITC
premises are
required to follow
the same EHS
systems applicable
to the Company’s
employees
139

Sustainable
Livelihoods
providers’ employees within ITC premises.
The total onsite lost time accidents for
service providers’ employees for the year

was 4 - an improvement of 76%, despite a
48% increase in number of service providers’
employees since 2012-13, as depicted below.

On site lost time accidents - Employees of Service Providers

16

16

15

14
12
10
8
6

4

4
2
0
2012-13

140

2013-14

2014-15

Social
Performance

Zero Accident Units
The following units at ITC attained the goal of ‘Zero Accidents’ in 2014-15:

Manufacturing
Units
l

l

l

l

l

l

Cigarette Units at
Munger, Kidderpore,
Saharanpur and Pune

Hotels

Offices

l

ITC Maurya

l

l

ITC Mughal

l

l

ITC Grand Central

l

ITC Rajputana

l

ITC Maratha

l

ITC Sonar

Paperboards and
Specialty Papers Units at
Bollaram and Tribeni

l

ITC Windsor

l

ITC Grand Chola

Foods Units at Haridwar
and Pune

l

ITC Gardenia

l

ITC Grand Bharat

l

My Fortune, Chennai

l

My Fortune, Bengaluru

Leaf Threshing Units at
Chirala and Mysuru
Packaging & Printing
Units at Tiruvottiyur,
Haridwar and Munger

Personal Care Products
Units at Haridwar and
Manpura

l

l
l

l

Over the years, the number of Units
delivering “zero on-site lost time accidents”
performance has progressively increased
and more importantly, have held on to their

l

l

WelcomHotel Sheraton,
New Delhi

l

ITC Kakatiya

l

ITC Head Office, Kolkata
Research Centre at
Rajahmundry
ITC Green Centre,
Gurgaon
Divisional Head Quarters
of Cigarettes Business,
Agri Business, Leaf
Tobacco Business,
Paperboards & Specialty
Papers Business,
Packaging & Printing
Business, Foods
Business, Matches &
Agarbattis and Education
and Stationery Products
Business
Central Projects
Organisation, Bengaluru
ITC Infotech - Bengaluru
and Kolkata

Fortune Resort Bay
Island
Classic Golf Resort,
Gurgaon

performance. Out of the above 45 units,
26 Units have been consistently achieving
“zero lost time accidents” status for the
last 3 years.

141

Sustainable
Livelihoods
Road Accidents Trend

All Units maintain
a conducive work
environment
meeting Indian/
International
standards on
hygiene, lighting,
ventilation and
effective controls
on noise and dust

25

25

20
20
15

17
13

10

10

5
0
2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2014-15

Off-site Safety
Performance

Occupational
Health

In line with its commitment to ensure the
safety of employees, ITC has also initiated
adequate measures to ensure safety of its
employees working off-site. In ITC, off-site is
defined as all places other than the premises
where posted, while on official duty,
including commuting to and from residence
to place of work. Since over the years the
majority of the road accidents have involved
2-wheeler riders, a user interactive 2-wheeler
rider’s safety programme was developed and
rolled out in 2011-12, which has now been
translated into Hindi for increasing reach.
It is likely that this has been a contributory
factor in bringing down the number of road
accidents to 13 (20 in 2013-14). During 201516, ITC plans to translate this programme into
Tamil, Telugu, Kannada and Malayalam so as
to further extend its reach. This programme
is now also being rolled out amongst supply
chain stakeholders, by imparting this training
to wholesale dealer personnel connected to
ITC’s Trade Marketing & Distribution vertical.

A healthy workforce is an important
contributor to ITC’s competitiveness
and sustainability. All Units maintain a
conducive work environment meeting
Indian/International standards on hygiene,
lighting, ventilation and effective controls
on noise and dust. Units are provided with
occupational health centres with adequate
medical staff to monitor occupational health
and provide immediate relief, when required.
In addition, at least 2% of total employees
are professionally trained as first aiders.

In addition, ITC is in the process of developing
a similar user interactive training module
specifically for four-wheeler users. The
target population would include managers/
employees who use four-wheelers for
commuting to/from residence to place of
work, as well as official trips. This 4-wheeler
defensive driving training module will be
rolled out in 2015-16.

142

2013-14

Identified medical examinations are
conducted at specified intervals for
various categories of employees based on
age as well as exposure to occupational
hazards. Accordingly in 2014-15, 15,535
employees underwent preventive medical
examinations and there were no occupation
related illnesses identified in any of ITC’s
Business Units.

HIV/AIDS and
Other Serious
Diseases
ITC remains committed to protecting its
employees from the threat posed by various
serious diseases including HIV/AIDS.
During 2014-15, the awareness/counselling
sessions conducted for the employees and

Social
Performance
communities around ITC’s Units covered a
total of 20,258 people, out of which 16,386
were employees of the Company, while the
remaining were local community members.

are relevant and take into account the
local socio-economic context to ensure the
transition from “awareness developed” to
“changed behaviour”.

The Road Ahead

While ITC will continue to focus on
strengthening the engineering control
measures through ‘design for safety’,
pre-commissioning/operational
audits
and training interventions, based on the
encouraging results achieved, ITC plans to
expand the coverage of behavioural based
safety and custom-made risk based training
programmes to other units. This approach
which
combines
empowerment
and
ownership with targeted interventions and
strict accountability should help ITC in its
journey to achieve the “Zero Accidents” goal.

Based on the root-cause analysis of accidents
over the years, the approach to safety has been
redefined with the focus now on fostering a
culture of safety and the use of behavioural
architecture techniques. In line with the
Company’s EHS policy, the approach is to
institutionalise safety as a value-led concept
with focus on inculcating a sense of ownership
at all levels, leading to the creation of a safety
culture. Periodic reviews are undertaken to
ensure that training and other communications

In line with
the Company’s
EHS policy, the
approach is to
institutionalise
safety as a valueled concept
with focus on
inculcating a sense
of ownership at all
levels

143

Social Investments–
Mission
Sunehra Kal

Management
Approach - Society
ITC believes that the performance of
business enterprises must be measured in
terms of the value they create for society.
Enterprises that embed sustainability in their
business strategies can deliver substantial
stakeholder value through innovative
development models that simultaneously
create sustainable livelihood opportunities
and a positive environmental footprint.
The Company firmly believes that such
an approach unleashes strong drivers for
achieving development with social equity.

Commitment to
Creating Larger
Societal Value
As part of its Triple Bottom Line commitment,
ITC is committed to make growth more
inclusive by focusing on the needs of three
identified stakeholders:
l

l

l

l

l

To nurture and develop social capital
to create a more level playing field for
skill-related vocations and to meet
the competitive demands for higher
productivity. Both, in turn, generate higher
incomes and help in alleviating poverty.
To explore a wider canvas of social
initiatives in the interest of the Nation.
ITC is committed to pursuing excellence
in sustainability and preserving India’s
unique cultural heritage.

The Board of the Company has approved
a CSR Policy that covers the programmes,
projects and activities that the Company
plans to undertake. These programmes fall
within the purview of Schedule VII of the
provisions of Section 135 of the Companies
Act, 2013 and the Companies (Corporate
Social Responsibility Policy) Rules, 2014.

Rural communities in the Company’s
operational areas.

Implementation

The communities residing in close proximity
to the Company’s production units.

The Board CSR Committee tables for the
Board’s approval, a CSR Plan outlining the
CSR Programmes to be carried out during
the financial year and the specified budgets
therein. The Board deliberates and approves
the CSR Plan with modifications that may
be deemed necessary. The Company’s
Corporate Management Committee (CMC)
reviews the implementation of the CSR
Programmes and issues necessary directions
from time to time to ensure orderly and
efficient execution of CSR Programmes in
accordance with this Policy. In addition, the
CMC provides a status update to the CSR and
Sustainability Committee on the progress
in implementation of the approved CSR
Programmes. The CSR and Sustainability
Committee reviews such reports and keeps
the Board apprised of the implementation
status of the same.

The central and state governments,
which
encourage
Public
Private
Partnerships (PPPs).

Constructive
Stakeholder
Engagement
The overarching aim of the Company’s
social sector engagement is to empower
stakeholder communities to conserve,
augment and manage their social and
environmental capital in order to promote
sustainable livelihoods or employability on
a significant scale. Within this, the three
specific objectives, pertaining to the two sets
of stakeholders, are:
l

strengthen the existing productive base
as well as provide alternate sources
of incomes, which help minimise the
dependence of farmers on rain-fed crops
for economic survival.

To
promote
climate-smart
rural
development by broad-basing farm and
off-farm livelihoods portfolio of the poor
and marginalised. Such interventions

145

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Outcomes
Innovative interventions have been designed
and implemented that:
	Create sustainable livelihoods for some
of the most disadvantaged sections of
the society.

l

	Nurture the environment by promoting
sustainability practices through industry
associations.

l

	Preserve and promote Indian heritage
and culture.

l

Recognising that business enterprises are
economic organs of society and draw on
societal resources, it is ITC’s belief that a
company’s performance must be measured
by its Triple Bottom Line contribution to
building economic, social and environmental
capital
towards
enhancing
societal
sustainability. ITC believes that enterprises
possess, beyond mere financial resources,
the transformational capacity to create gamechanging development models by unleashing

their power of entrepreneurial vitality,
innovation and creativity. In line with this
belief, ITC continues to craft unique models
to generate livelihoods and environmental
capital. Such Corporate Social Responsibility
(CSR) projects are far more replicable,
scalable and sustainable, with a significant
multiplier impact on sustainable livelihood
creation and environmental replenishment.

ITC’s Mission
Sunehra Kal for
Sustainable &
Inclusive Growth
ITC believes that in the strategic context of
business, enterprises possess, beyond mere
financial resources, the transformational
capacity
to
create
game-changing
development models by unleashing their
power of entrepreneurial vitality, innovation
and creativity. In line with this belief, ITC
continues to craft unique models to generate
livelihoods and environmental capital.
Such Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)
projects are far more replicable, scalable
and sustainable, with a significant multiplier
impact on sustainable livelihood creation
and environmental replenishment.
In line with ITC’s CSR Policy, the key
stakeholders and the thrust areas of its CSR
programmes comprise:
	The Rural communities in the Company’s
operational area. These communities
are mainly located in drought-prone
regions and therefore most vulnerable to
the adverse impacts of seasonality and
environmental degradation. Almost entirely
dependent on common property resources,
they are among the most disadvantaged
sections of rural communities.

l

	
The communities residing in close
proximity of ITC’s production units, whose
full potential cannot be realised due
to poor social infrastructure in the areas
of education, skill enhancement, health
and sanitation.

l

	The central and state governments, which
encourage PPPs to demonstrate scaleable
and replicable models of development.

l

146

Social
Performance

ITC’s Responses to Stakeholder Needs
Key
Stakeholders

Rural
households in
ITC’s operational
areas

Objectives
l	Biomass cover of 33% of
project areas
	
Progress towards ‘safe
groundwater zone’ status

l

	
Achieve
0.75-1%
organic carbon

l

soil

l	 Poor women to have access
to credit or supplementary
income
Communities
residing around
ITC’s factories

	Every child in school and
learning well

l

	Appropriate skills for all
unemployed youth

l

Strategic
Interventions

Desired
Outcomes

Natural Resource
Management,
Integrated Animal
Husbandry,
Sustainable
Agriculture

Sustainable
& accelerated
growth in
livelihoods and
farm incomes

Sustainable
Livelihoods
Creation, Social
Infrastructure,
Skilling

Dignity of
life through
economic
& social
empowerment

Initiatives
promoting national
goals of poverty
alleviation and
environmental
protection

Multistakeholder
partnership
to maximise
development
impact

l	 No open defecation

State & Central
Governments

Innovate and pilot
development models of
excellence for replication,
scale and efficient execution

ITC continues
to craft unique
models to generate
livelihoods and
environmental
capital. Such
Corporate Social
Responsibility
(CSR) projects are
replicable, scalable
and sustainable
147

Sustainable
Livelihoods

With a judicious
blend of click &
mortar capabilities,
ITC e-Choupal
has triggered a
virtuous cycle of
higher productivity,
higher incomes
and enlarged
capacity for farmer
risk management,
larger investments
and higher quality
and productivity

ITC e-Choupal
The ITC e-Choupal initiative is a powerful
example of a business model that delivers
large-scale societal value by co-creating rural
markets with local communities. Recognising
the various challenges faced by farmers like
fragmented farms, weak infrastructure and
involvement of numerous intermediaries,
ITC designed e-Choupal as a more efficient
supply chain aimed at delivering enhanced
value to all participants in the value chain,
including farmers, consumers and ITC.
With a judicious blend of click & mortar
capabilities, ITC e-Choupal has triggered a
virtuous cycle of higher productivity, higher
incomes and enlarged capacity for farmer
risk management, larger investments and
higher quality and productivity.
The
initiative
has
enhanced
the
competitiveness of Indian agriculture
by leveraging the power of Information
Technology to empower small and marginal
farmers. Village internet-kiosks managed
by farmers themselves, called “sanchalaks”,
facilitate access to information to other

148

farmers, in their own local language. Realtime information on weather forecasts
and market prices, customised knowledge
on scientific farm practices and risk
management are supplemented by the
availability of quality farm inputs and price
discovery of farm produce within the village.
A cluster of e-Choupals are supported by the
integrated rural services hubs called Choupal
Saagars, which serve as procurement
centres, warehouses, and retail outlets. A
process of engagement with rural consumers
was also launched in the form of Choupal
Haats, built along the lines of village fairs.
The e-Choupal network also provides on-farm
agri extension services. Reaching the fruits of
scientific and technological research to the
farmer, demonstration farms called Choupal
Pradarshan Khets have been set up to
propagate best practices, while field schools
enable transfer and adoption of knowledge.
The programme offers other services like
consultation and supervision by experts, soil
testing, balanced fertilisation, foundation
seeds and seed treatment, water, weed, pest
and post-harvest crops management and

Social
Performance

supply of quality inputs like drought-resistant
seeds to improve farm competencies.
ITC e-Choupal benefits all participants in
the value chain. It enhances the ability of
farmers to take informed decisions, aligns
their farm output with market demand and
ensures higher quality and productivity.
The aggregation of demand for farm inputs
from individual farmers gives them access
to high quality inputs from established
manufacturers at fair prices.
Traditional intermediaries, who are inducted
into the e-Choupal system as “samyojaks”
handle aggregation of the farm produce, and
earn incomes through the logistical service
they provide at the ITC procurement hubs.
For the customers of farm produce, ITC’s Agri
Business leverages the depth and width of
the e-Choupal network to offer tailor-made
solutions like multi-origin sourcing and
need-specific supply chains.
ITC itself benefits from an efficient supply
chain, agri raw material at lower net cost
and supply of identity-preserved produce,
which in turn give a competitive edge to its
packaged foods business.
Launched in June 2000, ITC e-Choupal
is today the largest initiative among all

Internet-based interventions in rural India.
Its services reach out to more than 4 million
farmers in over 40,000 villages through 6,500
kiosks spread across 11 states.
The intervention is an important component
of ITC’s multi-dimensional Integrated Rural
Development Programme that has evolved
from its deep understanding of the challenges
and opportunities inherent in the farm
sector. The strategy of this programme, apart
from empowering farmers and raising rural
incomes through ITC e-Choupal, also aims
at generation of supplementary income and
natural resource augmentation. Initiatives
such as Livestock Development and
Women Empowerment create avenues for
supplementary non-farm incomes to protect
against agri-income volatility as well as build
capacities for investment. The Watershed
Development as well as Afforestation
Programmes augment natural resources to
enable higher productivity, create a green
cover and restore soil health. The Swasthya
Choupal initiative focuses on enhancing
awareness of maternal & child care through
a network of Village Health Champions.
Taken together, these initiatives under the
Integrated Rural Development Programme
of ITC have had a transformational impact in
many areas of rural India.

ITC e-Choupal
benefits all
participants in
the value chain.
It enhances the
ability of farmers
to take informed
decisions, aligns
their farm output
with market
demand and
ensures higher
quality and
productivity
149

Sustainable
Livelihoods

ITC’s Social
Investment
Programmes
ITC has put in place a mutually reinforcing
CSR Programme, which has been designed
to liberate even the most underprivileged
and marginalised among these stakeholder
groups, from the shackles of poverty and
underdevelopment
through
economic
empowerment based on grassroots capacity
building. ITC is ideally positioned to respond
to these challenges, given its core objective
of empowering its stakeholder communities
to promote sustainable livelihoods, which,
in turn, is strategically aligned to the
national goals of poverty eradication and
environmental regeneration.

Given the
geographical
diversity of its
stakeholder
communities, ITC’s
main challenge
is to develop
social investment
models that could
be replicated
across locations
with the flexibility
to be tailored
to individual
community needs
150

Rural Households
– Climate Smart
Agriculture
Already
water-stressed
and
facing
widespread environmental degradation,
approximately two-third of the country’s
population is rural and dependent on
agriculture and allied activities for their
livelihoods. The overwhelming majority are
small/marginal farmers whose only option
is rain-fed agriculture. With a direct and
symbiotic dependence on climate sensitive
sectors, they naturally have low adaptive
capacities. Stagnating productivity is
exacerbated by the fragile natural resource
base, fragmented land-holdings, unscientific
land management practices, overuse of

chemical fertilisers, falling incomes and the
growing effects of climate change. Dwindling
bio-mass has created pressure on fodder
and energy needs for these households.
Livelihood security is further constrained by
limited off-farm employment options, poor
infrastructure and inadequate marketing
channels. These factors all combine to
perpetuate a cycle of endemic poverty.
Given the geographical diversity of its
stakeholder communities, ITC’s main challenge
is to develop models that could be replicated
across locations with the flexibility to be
tailored to individual community needs. These
twin concerns are addressed by a faithful
adherence to four fundamental tenets:
	Enhance the ecological resource base
of the rural economy by strengthening
community-based governance of natural
resources that protects, preserves,
nurtures and expands such resources;

l

	
Employ a bottom-up participatory
approach that ensures an in-built flexibility
to address diverse needs – aiming to create
empowered village institutions and enable
communities to co-operatively conserve
and manage their resources;

l

	Encourage collaborative processes and
multi-stakeholder partnerships to enable
identification of the best strategies to
address community needs and expand the
development footprint of each project;

l

	Put in place end-to-end solutions that
address the spectrum of needs of these
communities instead of focusing solely on
a single issue.

l

Social
Performance

Coverage
The projects promoted under the Social
Investments programme, numbering 132, are
spread over 14 states covering 71 districts.
The interventions reach out to nearly 7 lakh
households in more than 10,600 villages.
Of the total projects implemented, 71% are
designed for rural stakeholder households,
while the balance 29% address stakeholders
residing around the Company’s factories.
ITC’s CSR programmes are spread across
the states of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar,
Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan,
Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttarakhand, Uttar
Pradesh and West Bengal.
Particulars

2013
-14

2014
-15

Cum to
2014-15

719

1,284

3,720

12,827 17,397

70,067

Activity

2013-14 2014-15

Projects (No.)

110

132

States (No.)

13

14

Districts (No.)

61

71

Villages (No.)

9,176

10,621

Beneficiaries
(Hh-lakhs)

6.42

6.70

Coverage
No. of new
villages
No. of new
beneficiaries

Plantation Area
Pulpwood (ha) 12,649 10,109

54,714

Energy (ha)
Saplings
Planted
(Lakhs)
Agro Forestry
Area (ha)

1,083

10,246

12,823

888

1,078

4,014

3,848

9,241

13,911

greened over 2,00,000 hectares of area that
generated over 90 million person-days of
employment. Since its introduction in 201112, the area under agro-forestry has increased
rapidly covering more than four-fifths of the
total eucalyptus plantations today.
Agro-forestry Area as % of EC (%)

Social Forestry
Targeted at small and marginal landholders
from economically weaker sections of the
society, the Social Forestry programme is
designed to promote livelihoods through
plantations by providing financial, technical
and marketing support.

85%

88%

2013-14

2014-15

64%
28%

2011-12

2012-13

Performance
Pulpwood plantations are being promoted
in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana in the
districts of Khammam, Warangal, Nalgonda,
Krishna, West Godavari, East Godavari and
Visakhapatnam. Energy plantations, to meet
the fuel and fodder needs of farmers, were
promoted in the districts of Guntur, Prakasam
and Nellore of AP and Chamarajanagar,
Mysore, Mandya, Hassan and Chikkaballapur
districts of Karnataka.
Commencing in 2001-02, the programme
currently has nearly 54,714 hectares under
pulpwood plantation and 12,823 hectares
under energy plantation. To date, both the
Farm and Social Forestry programmes have

151

Sustainable
Livelihoods

The Company’s
Watershed
Development
Programme
promotes local
management of
water resources
by facilitating
community-based
participation
in planning
and executing
watershed projects

Total wood harvested during 2014-15 was
75,266 metric tonnes of which 10,629 metric
tonnes were FSC 100% category wood,
generating a total wealth of nearly `61 crores
for poor and marginal farmers. A recent study
showed that plantation incomes contributed
nearly half of the total household income,
Activity

2013-14 2014-15

Harvest
Area (Ha.)

1,623

2,000

Farmers (No.)

2,321

3,533

Volume harvested (MT)

60,519

75,266

Total Income (`Lakhs)

2,949

6,078

20

13

Repayment to
committee/NGO
(`Lakhs)

Earnings/Household (`) 1,27,067

1,72,036

Earnings/Hectare (`)

3,03,902

1,81,724

representing earnings from a previously
unproductive asset.
In order to increase productivity, to give
a further boost to incomes, S&MC (Soil &
Moisture Conservation) measures were
introduced in the Social Forestry areas.
Water absorption trenches and field trench
cum bunds were constructed to increase
soil moisture while composting units were
promoted for improving soil fertility. Nearly
1,900 hectares were treated in Khammam,
Warangal, Nalgonda, East Godavari, Krishna
and Nellore districts. 13 tanks were desilted
and the silt excavated was applied on farmers’
fields to enhance soil fertility.
To meet the increasing demand of saplings
during the planting season, women-owned
subabul nurseries were established this year,
which raised 30 lakh saplings for the Social
Forestry programme. Training was also given to
the women members on bamboo nursery raising.

Trend in Farm Income

3,50,000
2014-15

3,00,000
2,50,000

2013-14

2,00,000
2012-13
1,50,000
2011-12

1,00,000
50,000

2010-11
Income Per Household (`/HH)

152

Income Per Hectare (`/ha.)

Social
Performance

Soil and Moisture Conservation
The Company’s Watershed Development
Programme promotes local management of
water resources by facilitating communitybased participation in planning and
executing watershed projects for the small
and marginal farmers who are almost entirely
dependent on common property resources,
including water.

Performance
Commencing in 2000-01, the programme
is currently spread across 1,182 villages in
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Karnataka, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan,
Tamil Nadu and Telangana. During 201415, 51,397 hectares were brought under
watershed development, the highest ever
since the inception of the programme. With
this the total area covered to date has crossed
Activity

the 2 lakh hectares mark. Cumulatively
6,464 water-harvesting structures have
been constructed, thus creating fresh water
storage capacity of 24.97 Million Kl.
As part of Company’s objective to create
empowered village institutions that can
function autonomously and play an active role
in collective community action, 1,483 new
Water User Groups (WUGs) have been formed

till date. These groups have undergone
intensive training in watershed management
techniques, structure maintenance, water use
regulation and formulation of user charges.
In order to improve the watershed
development programme, hydro-geology
was introduced as an additional feature
of watershed planning in order to ensure
maximum groundwater recharge based on
technical and scientific assessments.

2013-14

2014-15

Cum to 2014-15

Minor Structures (No.)

533

1,159

4,135

Major Structures (No.)

300

331

2,329

Total Structures

833

1,490

6,464

Area Treated (Ha)

19,664

32,644

1,30,969

Critical Irrigation Area (Ha)

12,998

18,753

69,218

Total Watershed Area

32,662

51,397

2,00,186

2.43

3.22

24.97

19,426

32,960

1,60,354

4.94

7.15

47.33

Water-harvesting

Watershed Area

Water Storage Capacity (Million KI)
Direct Beneficiaries (No.)
Empl mandays (lakhs)

153

Sustainable
Livelihoods
Progress in PPP Projects by Sources

IWDP/IWMP
12,406

34,285

MGNREGA
27,020

41,095

NABARD
8,950

34,500
0%

20%
Actual

40%

Coverage Area in PPP Projects by Source

NABARD 27%

MGNREGA 43%

154

80%

100%

Balance

The total area to be brought under soil
and moisture conservation through PPP
projects currently stands at 1.58 lakh
hectares. By the end of 2014-15, 79% of
the total target area under the NABARD
projects had been completed in Madhya
Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Rajasthan and Bihar. 34% of the target area
under the IWMP/MGNREGA collaborations
in Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and
Rajasthan has been completed so far. In a
major recognition of the quality of our work,
the watershed development programme,
being implemented in Jhalawar district of

IWDP/ IWMP 23%

60%

Partner

MoU Area (Ha)

Nabard

43,450

Rajasthan Government

43,117

Madhya Pradesh
Government

23,944

Maharashtra
Government

47,744

Grand Total

1,58,255

Rajasthan, has been selected by NABARD to
implement the Climate Change Adaptation
Programme funded by UNFCC.

Animal Husbandry and Dairy
Development
ITC’s Livestock Development Programme
aims to genetically upgrade low-yielding
indigenous
stock
through
artificial
insemination
to
produce
cross-bred
progeny with much higher milk yields. The
programme enables the most marginalised
– small-holders, the landless, womenheaded households and migrant groups – to
convert an existing asset into a substantial
supplementary income with the potential of
growing into a profitable new livelihood.

Social
Performance

Performance
Cum
2013- 2014to
14
15
201415

Activity
CDC Centres
(Functional Nos.)

261

256

256

Breed Improvement
No. of Ais (lakhs)

2.55

2.24

15.61

No. of
pregnancies
(lakhs)

1.40

1.04

7.28

No. of calfing
(lakhs)

0.91

0.80

4.79

Vaccination &
Health (lakhs)

0.14

0.43

5.46

UP
46

Odisha
10

AP
27

CSR initiatives aimed at enhancing milk
production, increasing dairy farm productivity
and ensuring remunerative prices to farmers
in multiple locations continued to make good
progress. The Dairy Development programme
is currently sourcing an average of 32,000 lpd
(Litres Per Day) of milk, with a peak of 57,000
lpd, in Munger and Saharanpur from 6,470
farmers. As part of this initiative, during the
year ITC also piloted an end-to-end mobile
enabled farm automation and IT solution
for productivity enhancement, real-time
management of cattle herds’ health, fertility,
milk quality, productivity and providing
farm management inputs to farmers, which
currently covers 1,000 animals.

Improved Agricultural
Practices

Tel
8
Kar
38

MP
82

bred progeny have been born and animal
husbandry services were provided to over
11.70 lakh breedable cattle.

Mah
45

Initiated in 2003-04, there are currently
256 Cattle Development Centres (CDCs) in
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Karnataka, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh
and Telangana. To date, 4.79 lakh cross-

Intrinsically linked to ITC’s watershed
development programme, the core purpose of
this intervention is to promote a combination of
bio-mechanical solutions for optimising water
management and enhancing land productivity
to create a stable agricultural regime.

Performance
521 Farmer Field Schools were functional
and played a pivotal role in disseminating
advanced agri-practices to over 21,000
farmers through 7,736 demonstration plots

155

Sustainable
Livelihoods
Activity

2013-14

2014-15

Cum to 2014-15

Group Irrigation (No.)

115

58

670

Sprinklers (No.)

385

879

2,068

IPNM/Varietal Demo plots (Nos.)

14,695

7,736

34,078

IPNM/Varietal Demo Area (Ha.)

6,194

2,717

11,843

Compost Units (Nos.)

5,440

3,668

23,554

Farmer Field Schools (Functional Nos.)

284

521

521

Farmer Field Students (Functional Nos.)

5,562

21,064

21,064

88

137

137

2,447

15,454

15,454

Minor Irrigation

Sustainable Agriculture

Agri Business Centres
No. of ABCs (Functional Nos.)
Farmers Serviced (No.)
covering over 18,000 hectares under different
crops. 137 Agri-Business Centres rendered
extension services and technical knowhow
on advanced package of practices to over
15,000 farmers. Promotion of sprinklers
received special focus, especially in Madhya
Pradesh, with 499 units established during
the year. In pursuit of ITC’s long term
sustainability objective of increasing soil
organic carbon, 3,668 compost units were
constructed during the year thus taking the
cumulative total to 23,554.

The primary focus
in the catchment
of ITC’s factories
is to create the
necessary and
enabling preconditions for
future growth
and prosperity of
households living
below the poverty
line (BPL)
156

In addition, Choupal Pradarshan Khets
promoted field demonstrations of seed
varieties and production practices for
improved yield and quality in soybean, wheat,
rice, summer pulses and horticultural crops
in more than 1,200 villages covering around
21,000 hectares and more than 60,000
farmers. The focus of these demonstrations
was on sustainable farm practices like
moisture conservation, promotion of biofertilisers, zero-tillage, prophylactic pest
management, etc.

Factory
Catchments –
Creating Social
Capital
Habitats around industrial clusters are
typically overcrowded and congested.
Infrastructure is poor or creaking under the

pressure of an increasing population base,
drawn to such regions in the hope of gainful
employment. Sanitary facilities are almost
non-existent creating unhygienic conditions
which have a direct bearing on high morbidity
rates, especially among women, a distinctive
trait in such settlements.
The primary focus in the catchment of our
factories is to create the necessary and
enabling pre-conditions for future growth
and prosperity of households living below the
poverty line (BPL). A few of the fundamental
causes for people feeling disempowered
and apathetic towards their future are lack
of employment opportunities. These are
aggravated by illiteracy and ill-health, which
prevents them from seizing opportunities
that the labour market offers because they
are either unqualified or energy-deficient.

Women’s Economic
Empowerment
Targeting the most marginalised, BPL and
SC/ST women the programme operates in
the rural hinterlands of factory catchments
to mobilise them to act collectively through
empowered micro-credit groups and/or
micro-enterprises that provide them with an
array of earning opportunities.

Performance
Self Help Groups (SHGs): Commencing in
the year 2000, the programme currently
supports 2,057 operational SHGs with over

Social
Performance
23,000 members. A major thrust was given
to financial inclusion of women members by
opening bank accounts for 1,335 of them in
2014-15. Cumulatively, over 40,000 women
were gainfully employed either through
micro-enterprises or assisted with loans to
pursue income generating activities.

Education

Micro Enterprises: Agarbatti production,
as a micro-enterprise was operational in
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh,
Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Telangana
engaging over 4,000 women in hand rolling,
pedal rolling and scenting operations. By
the end of 2014-15, raw batti production
was 2,457 MT while the despatch of scented
battis was 751 million sticks.

During
2014-15,
36,000
children
were covered through the Read India
Programme and 34,000 children through
Supplementary Learning Centres (SLCs),
taking the cumulative total to 4.06 lakhs.
147 government primary schools (including
Anganwadis) were provided infrastructure
support comprising boundary walls,
additional classrooms, sanitation units,

Production Trends - Raw Battis (MT)

SLC spread

ITC’s Education programme is designed
to provide children from weaker sections
access to education with special focus on
quality and retention.

Performance

2,457
Karnataka
20
1,445

WB
66

AP
68
Telangana
35

834
195
2010
-11

336

2011
-12

Bihar
182
2012
-13

2013
-14

2014
-15

157

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Activity

201314

201415

Cum
to
201415

47

147

1,158

Education
Govt Schools
Infra support
(Nos.)
Children
covered (Read
India & SLC)

0.30

0.70

4.06

Children
covered
through Read
India Plus
(Nos.)

0.23

0.36

0.60

marginalised youth enabling them to align better
with the emerging needs of the job market. The
programme focuses on building market relevant
skills so as to make potential job seekers industryready and employable in the manufacturing,
construction or service sectors.

Performance
Commencing in 2001, to date the programme
has covered over 19,000 youth under
different trades in Andhra Pradesh, Assam,
Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka,
Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
Telangana, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and
West Bengal. In 2014-15, enrolment attained
Female % Against Total Enrolment

Vocational Training
Students
enrolled
(Nos.)
Students
placed (Nos.)

13,180
2,443

13,180

19,495

279

3,280

4,477

furniture and electrical fittings, thus taking
the total number of government primary
schools covered till date to 1,158.

Vocational Training
ITC’s Vocational Training programme plays an
active role in building and upgrading skills of

ITC’s Vocational
Training
programme plays
an active role
in building and
upgrading skills of
marginalised youth
enabling them to
align better with
the emerging
needs of the job
market

158

3,872

2,443

35%

26%

36%

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

14,000
12,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000

an all-time high figure of 13,180 students in
different trades, of which 10,378 completed
training (79% of the total). The balance are
in the process of completion of their training

Social
Performance

during 2015-16. Female students comprised
36% of the total enrolment and SC-ST formed
41% of the total enrolment.
The Company continues to work with the
Welcomgroup Graduate School of Hotel
Administration together with Dr TMA Pai
Foundation to cater to the ever growing need
for professionally trained human resources
in the hospitality industry. In addition, a
Culinary Institute was opened in Chhindwara
during 2014, to impart cooking skills to
youth from the lower economic strata.
Leveraging its core competencies in the
FMCG sector, an employability programme to
skill unemployed youth on FMCG sales and
distribution was launched across various
locations of the country. Candidates who
successfully completed the programme were
certified by the National Skill Development
Corporation (NSDC) and have been gainfully
employed in the FMCG sector.

15 were the highest compared to all
previous years. Household contribution
for increased ownership, community
mobilisation and awareness campaigns
instilled behaviour change among the
users, which will continue to be the
IHHT 14-15

Uttarakhand
675

UP
125

AP
494

TN
354

Bihar
1,211

Karnataka
569
IHHT Trends

Sanitation
In order to promote overall health and
hygiene through prevention of open
defecation and to reduce incidence of
water-borne diseases, 8,254 individual
household toilets have been constructed
to date. ITC has followed a methodology
of
community
mobilisation
and
contribution around factory locations of
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttarakhand, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and
Karnataka. The achievements in 2014-

Telangana
150

3,578

829
283

275

2010
-11

2011
-12

352
2012
-13

2013
-14

2014
-15

Note: IHHT – Individual Household Toilets

In order to promote
overall health and
hygiene through
prevention of
open defecation
and to reduce
incidence of waterborne diseases,
8,254 individual
household
toilets have been
constructed to date

159

Sustainable
Livelihoods
driving force to encourage greater usage
of toilets and contribute to a cleaner
environment.
In areas with problems of water quality,
19 plants have been installed to provide
safe drinking water to about 28,000 rural
households in Andhra Pradesh. Swasthya
Choupal, the Company’s e-Choupal Rural
Health initiative was consolidated in seven
districts of Uttar Pradesh and expanded to
three new districts in Madhya Pradesh with a
coverage of over 450 villages.

Solid Waste Management
ITC’s Solid Waste Management programme,
‘WOW – Well Being Out of Waste’, inculcates
the habit of source segregation and recycling
among school children, housewives and
general public as well as industries and
business enterprises. The WOW movement
today extends to Hyderabad, Chennai,
Bengaluru, Coimbatore and some towns
of Telangana, with the support of over 3
million citizens, 5,00,000 school children,
350 corporates, more than 1,000 commercial
establishments and around 200 industrial
plants. On the occasion of the 3rd anniversary
of National Recycling Day, a novel pilot
programme was launched in twelve selected

wards of Bengaluru with the support of Bruhat
Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP). A
similar pilot programme was also launched
in 30 wards of Coimbatore. The pilot aims to
create sustainable livelihoods for rag pickers
and waste collectors by propagating source
segregation at each of the households and
facilitating effective collection mechanisms
in collaboration with Municipal corporations.
This programme is aimed at promoting a
clean and green environment and providing
a sustainable source of livelihood for ragpickers and waste collectors.
A similar programme is currently active near
ITC’s operations in Saharanpur, Tribeni and

Solid Waste Management

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

Households
Covered

8,189

9,613

9,702

27,164

Total Waste
Collected (MT)

1,076

1,498

2,201

2,717

Revenue
(` lakhs)

38.33

43.91

53.29

67.07

Municipal
Dump

175

284

305

418

Municipal
Dump (%)

16%

19%

14%

15%

90

125

183

226

3.19

3.66

4.44

5.59

Waste Handled
per month
(MT)
Revenue per
month
(` lakhs)

160

Social
Performance
Munger, with focus on door-to-door collection
of household waste and segregation at site
in order to re-cycle and compost so as to
minimise the load at municipal dump sites. By
end of 2014-15, the programme had covered
over 27,000 households and handled 226
tonnes of waste per month, on an average.
Only 15% of the total waste collected is being
dumped untreated. The projects earned nearly
`5.58 lakhs per month as revenue which went
towards meeting part of the administration
and overhead costs.

The Road Ahead
	 Social Forestry: While area will be increased
by 20,000 hectares every year, equal focus
will be given to increase productivity from
41 tons/hectare today to 55 tons/hectare by
2017-18, and 65 tons by 2020.

l

	 Soil
and
Moisture
Conservation:
Introduce groundwater based planning in
a phase-wise manner in order to convert
all core project locations to “safe groundwater zone”.

l

	 Bio Diversity Conservation: Conserve
available
trees/groves
to
improve
green cover and species diversity in
the conservation plots by 50% against
baseline by 2020.

l

	 Improved Agricultural Practices: Promote
Sustainable Agriculture in the core project
areas to increase productivity by 20% and
reduce cost of cultivation by 20%.

l

	 Women Empowerment: Focus on Women
Headed Households and very Poor
Households in all our catchments in order
to drive financial inclusion, maternal
and child health awareness, and microenterprise/self-employment.

l

	 Education:
Benchmark
performance
against the state Annual Status of
Education Reports (ASER) and ensure
superior
impact
through
deeper
penetration in current catchments,
strengthening school infrastructure and
special coaching for weaker children.

l

	 Vocational Training: Continue to provide
training in skills to over 10,000 youth every
year in vocations that are in great demand
in the market.

l

	 Health & Hygiene: Strive to achieve allround improvement in critical health
indicators by ensuring open-defecationfree zones in our project areas, promoting
source segregation of waste and supply of
potable drinking water.

l

161

Sustainable
Livelihoods

The CII-ITC Centre
of Excellence
for Sustainable
Development
interacts with the
Government and
policy makers
to promote
sustainable
development and
inclusive growth
through corporate
action

Responsible
Advocacy

Creating Enduring
Institutions

ITC believes that it is necessary to represent
to and engage with authorities on matters
concerning the various sectors in which
it operates. The Board approved Policy on
Responsible Advocacy provides the framework
for the necessary interface with Government/
Regulatory Authorities. ITC works with apex
industry institutions that are engaged in policy
advocacy, like the Confederation of Indian
Industry, Federation of Indian Chambers
of Commerce and Industry, Associated
Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India
and various other forums including regional
Chambers of Commerce. ITC’s engagement
with the relevant authorities is guided by the
values of commitment, integrity, transparency
and the need to balance interests of diverse
stakeholders.

CII-ITC Centre of Excellence
for Sustainable Development

The Company, for its social development
projects, organises meetings with the local
administration and state governments to seek
their participation and involvement. Their
expert advice and counsel are also sought
and approvals obtained, where required, for
the planned interventions. The Company also
engages in public-private-partnerships (PPP)
with the state governments for such projects.
The CII-ITC Centre of Excellence for
Sustainable Development also interacts with
the Government and policy makers to promote
sustainable development and inclusive growth
through corporate action.

The CII–ITC Centre of Excellence for
Sustainable
Development,
established
by ITC in 2006 in collaboration with the
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII),
continues its endeavours to promote
sustainable business practices among Indian
enterprises. The Centre is steered by its
Advisory Council, led by Mr Y C Deveshwar,
Chairman, ITC Limited, and comprises
members from industry, government, civil
society and institutions, which provides
strategic direction to the organisation.
During the year the Centre, in partnership
with the International Integrated Reporting
Council (IIRC), has set up a country-level
network, the IR Lab India, to promote
Integrated Reporting (IR). The objective of
IR Lab is to build capacities of companies in
India on integrated reporting and to represent
concerns of Indian business to the IIRC.
The Centre also hosted the India Business &
Biodiversity Initiative (IBBI) with the support
of German International Cooperation (GIZ).
Launched on the occasion of International
Day for Biological Diversity on May 22, 2014,
the IBBI serves as a national platform of
business and its stakeholders for dialogue,
sharing and learning, ultimately leading to
mainstreaming sustainable management of
biological diversity in businesses. The Centre
and GIZ have partnered also with CREM, the
Netherlands, to build capacity of member
companies in biodiversity management.
In addition, at the request of the Ministry
of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
(MoEFCC), the Centre has drafted a single
window clearance form for environment,
forests and wildlife clearances with inputs
from members of the CII National Committee
on Environment as well as top government
officials. The Centre also has been engaged
with the Cabinet Secretariat’s Project
Management Group to suggest ways to
increase transparency and accountability in
the project appraisal process.

162

Social
Performance
The 9th Annual Sustainability Solutions
Summit continued its legacy of bringing
together thought-and-action leaders from
across the globe to discuss and propagate
innovative and actionable solutions towards
building a more sustainable future. The Centre
recognises and rewards the most significant
contributions to sustainable development in
the country through the CII-ITC Sustainability
Awards. In 2014, the Awards were presented
to 27 companies.
The Centre has been building capacities of
companies on the new CSR legislation as per
the Companies Act 2013. In 2014, the Centre
conducted seven open workshops in Delhi,
Mumbai, Lucknow, Bhubaneshwar, Chennai,
Vishakapatnam and Goa. The Centre is also
offering services to companies in baseline
studies, measurement of human development
indictors, and social return on investments. 

ITC Sangeet Research
Academy
The ITC Sangeet Research Academy (ITC-SRA)
is an embodiment of sustained corporate
commitment to a priceless national heritage.
It is a unique institution – the only gurukul
of its kind - that has been at the forefront of
promoting the ancient tradition of Hindustani
Classical Music. Blending modern-day
research methods with the purity of the age old
Guru-Shishya tradition, ITC-SRA is recognised
as the finest repository of Hindustani Classical
Music in terms of musical talent, music
education and archives. Producing musicians
of stature, it has been a catalyst in ensuring
the popularity of Hindustani Classical Music.
Its list of illustrious Gurus includes Vidushi
Girija Devi, Ustad Abdul Rashid Khan,
Pandit Buddhadev Das Gupta, Pandit
Ulhas Kashalkar, Pandit Ajoy Chakrabarty,
Pandit Arun Bhaduri, Ustad Mashkoor Ali
Khan, Pandit Partha Chatterjee, Vidushi
Subhra Guha and Pandit Uday Bhawalkar.
Musician Tutors Omkar Dadarkar, Abir
Hossain, Brajeswar Mukherjee, Aniruddha
Bhattacharya, Arshad Ali Khan, Kumar Mardur
and Waseem Ahmed Khan are rising stars in
the firmament of Hindustani Classical Music.
With 53 gifted Scholars carefully selected
from all over the country and a dedicated
team of Gurus and Musician Tutors, ITC-SRA
continues to passionately pursue its mission

of preserving, propagating and promoting
Hindustani Classical Music.
While relentlessly focusing on Hindustani
Classical Music, the Academy has also
expanded the range of its offerings to include
Carnatic concerts as well. The Academy is
currently engaged in carrying the message
of Hindustani Classical Music across the
country from the metros to rural India. The
Academy also constantly endeavours to
work with other music organisations and
institutions of repute.
The Academy continued with its traditional
programmes as well as broke new ground with
fresh initiatives such as the Malhar festival in
August and the Arpan soiree in September,
culminating in the ITC Sangeet Sammelan in
December last year. In addition, collaboration
with the India Habitat Centre at Delhi on the
Morning Ragas series launched in October last
year was extremely well received with Vidushi
Girija Devi performing at the inaugural event.
The Academy’s thrust on a collaborative effort
to revisit Kolkata’s magnificent heritage
continued with programmes co-sponsored
by the All Bengal Music Conference, the
Bhowanipore Sangeet Sammelani, the
Dover Lane Music Conference and other
organisations. Efforts to showcase the
Academy’s talent across the country
continued with several performances in
Mumbai, Bengaluru, Lucknow and Varanasi.
These performances served the purpose
of showcasing the exceptional talent of
our Scholars, Gurus and the Academy’s
commitment to the cause of Indian
Classical Music.

Blending modernday research
methods with the
purity of the age
old Guru-Shishya
tradition, ITC-SRA
is recognised as the
finest repository
of Hindustani
Classical Music

163

Product
Responsibility

Management
Approach
Customer Health and Safety
As a Company engaged in the FMCG and
Hospitality sectors, ITC’s products and
services reach out to a large number of
consumers. The Company has stringent
processes and systems to ensure that all
products and services are in compliance
with relevant regulatory requirements. In
addition, product and service attributes are
constantly evaluated against international
standards and best practices.
ITC’s commitment towards ensuring
compliance with relevant standards of health
and safety commences at the design stage.
Appropriate health and safety elements
across procurement, manufacturing and
delivery are identified and evaluated, based
on which control measures are implemented
as necessary. Global developments in health
and safety are also reviewed constantly
to provide appropriate insights. This is

Business

Agri Business

supported by comprehensive research and
testing facilities at the ITC Life Sciences
& Technology Centre, whose laboratories
conform to ISO/IEC 17025 and are certified
by National Accreditation Board for Testing
and Calibration (NABL). Manufacturing units
and hotels have state-of-the-art facilities
and technology as well as internationally
benchmarked quality management systems.
These are constantly reviewed to keep them
contemporary and relevant. The quality
performance of third party manufacturing
facilities is also monitored on a daily basis.
The summary of systems and initiatives
across some of ITC’s businesses is presented
below:

Initiatives for improvement of health and safety
impacts of products/services
The Business primarily engages in sourcing of agricommodities like Wheat, Coffee, Potato, Shrimps, Soya
and Processed Fruits. These commodities are sourced
and supplied based on customer requirements of quality,
quantity and packaging. Stringent process control and
quality inspection norms have been established to ensure
compliance with customer requirements. Systems and
processes are in place to ensure the hygiene of the stored
stocks. Products are shipped after meticulous testing either
in-house, or at accredited labs or agencies, if required by the
customers. For organic and sustainable farm practices in
the processed fruits business catering to specific customer
segments, the Business has received the following
international certifications:
	Fairtrade certification endorsing that its products meet
certain environmental, labour, and developmental standards.

l

	 Demeter Certification for Biodynamic Farming, a holistic
method of agriculture.

l

	 USDA Organic Certification for Organic Farming.

l

	 Bio-Suisse Certification for Organic Farming.

l

165

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Business

Branded Packaged Foods

Initiatives for improvement of health and safety
impacts of products/services
61 out of 69 manufacturing locations, including third party
manufacturing units, are Hazard Analysis and Critical
Control Point (HACCP)/ISO 22000 certified, ensuring that
products use the best quality ingredients and utilise the
highest quality processes. The objective is to continuously
provide consumers with products that not only “Taste Good”
but also “Do Good”. Consequently, large investments have
been made in R&D to deliver relevant functionalities based
upon specific formulations for identified health needs,
like reducing salt, sugar and oil across all products. These
investments are likely to show results over the medium to
long term. Products like ‘Sunfeast Oats Marie’ and ‘Sunfeast
Farmlite’ attempt to seamlessly integrate healthy ingredients
like oats and fibre into consumer snacking preferences.
Market surveys for determining customer preference for
products with specific functionalities were completed in
2014-15 and the market release for such products will be
determined based on production viability. As on date, 90%
by volume of ITC’s biscuits are trans-fat free.
In 2014-15, daily staple food products like multigrain
atta and fortified atta started reaching larger areas of the
country. Smaller packs of these products also helped in
gaining access to a wider section of society.

61 out of 69
manufacturing
locations, including
third party
manufacturing
units of the Foods
Business, are
Hazard Analysis
and Critical Control
Point (HACCP)/ISO
22000 certified,
ensuring that
products use
the best quality
ingredients and
utilise the highest
quality processes

166

Cigarettes

The Business uses proprietary software to regularly monitor
and review product specifications of all raw materials.
With consistent focus on product innovation, new product
development in the Business involves consideration of
global developments and is supported by comprehensive
research and testing facilities at the ITC Life Sciences &
Technology Centre.

Leaf Tobacco

Product hygiene standards in tobacco cultivation are
accorded the highest importance. Accordingly, awareness
among tobacco farmers on the importance of sustainably
producing residue-free quality tobacco is constantly
reinforced during field-level trainings and seminars in
ITC’s operating regions. For frequent assessment on
product integrity, farm-level and packed-level toxicant
audit studies are undertaken wherein all leaf samples from
farmlands and packed cases of finished products are closely
monitored for toxic residues. Several additional measures
were implemented across the value chain during the year
towards minimisation of Non Tobacco Related Matter.

Personal Care Products

The Business follows a comprehensive approach for
improving the health and safety impacts of its products in
each of the lifecycle stages including R&D, certification as
well as manufacturing and production.

Social
Performance

Business

Personal Care Products
(contd.)

Initiatives for improvement of health and safety
impacts of products/services
All safety tests from prototype development to final product
are conducted in accordance with standard international
guidelines.
Ingredients used in products undergo rigorous analysis, based
on existing scientific literature, for their toxicity and skin
sensitisation prior to clearance for use in product development.
Product safety and efficacy is certified through external
accredited laboratories.
Products are manufactured in a highly automated
environment under strict hygienic conditions.
Documented Quality Management System, including
procured material checks, in-process checks and finished
goods quality checks, ensures that the manufactured
products are consistent and of high quality.

Hotels

ITC Hotels have established food safety management
systems certified as per HACCP/ISO 22000. In addition,
ITC Hotels R&D endeavours to adhere to GHP & GMP (Good
Hygiene Practices & Good Manufacturing Practices). The
Hotels Business also conforms to relevant applications of
PAS 220 (Prerequisite programmes on food safety for food
manufacturing). ITC has elaborate fire safety guidelines
which all hotels comply with. These guidelines are based
on National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Codes and
other international best practices. They supplement the
general EHS Guidelines applicable to all ITC Businesses,
the compliance of which is audited by the Corporate EHS
Department on a regular basis.

Education and Stationery
Products

The Business uses only approved non-hazardous materials
like ECF (Elemental Chlorine Free) paper, ink, dyes, etc.
Since the primary consumers of these products are children,
stringent processes and quality control measures are in
place to ensure their safety.

Lifestyle Retailing

All raw materials and garments are tested at the in-house
laboratory for post usage experience and conformance to
quality standards. The standards and product specifications
are periodically validated by international testing agencies.
Quality is monitored through an internal Product Quality
Rating System (PQRS) together with the external Acceptable
Quality Level (AQL) norm that is followed internationally by
apparel businesses. The Wills Lifestyle range (excluding
the Wills Signature garments) has received the “Oeko-Tex”
certification (w.e.f. January 2012), becoming the first brand

All safety tests
from prototype
development
to final product
are conducted
in accordance
with standard
international
guidelines

167

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Business

Lifestyle Retailing
(contd.)

Packaging and Printing

Packaging
solutions are being
developed that
use environment
friendly raw
materials such
as water-based
varnishes and
reduced material
usage in terms of
mass and thickness
of products

168

Initiatives for improvement of health and safety
impacts of products/services
in the domestic apparel retail segment in India to obtain
such a recognition. The certification has been conferred
by Hohenstein Textile Testing Institute GmbH & Co. KG,
Germany. It guarantees that the products are free from
more than 100 harmful substances and ensures that Wills
Lifestyle garments are completely safe for consumers,
without compromising on relevant style quotient of its
products.

Various initiatives have been undertaken in developing
packaging solutions that use environment friendly raw
materials such as water-based varnishes and reduced
material usage in terms of mass and thickness of products.
The Business engages with customers on a continuous basis
to provide solutions that help protect functional needs like
product integrity and visual imagery, whilst providing scope
for use of alternate materials. The bulk of board packaging
is already being done with non-toluene based inks. In the
area of flexibles packaging, joint projects with customers
have been undertaken to promote sustainable flexibles
and printing with non-toluene and non-ketone based inks.
In order to strengthen the health & safety requirement
of products (Quality and Hygiene), all key operations at
Haridwar and Tiruvottiyur factories have been certified as
per British Retail Consortium (BRC) Global Standard for
Packaging and Packaging Material.

Social
Performance

Business

Paperboards and
Specialty Papers

Initiatives for improvement of health and safety
impacts of products/services
ITC has been the pioneer in manufacturing Elemental
Chlorine Free (ECF) pulp in India. This ensures that the
levels of dioxins and furans in the pulp are less than 1 PPT
(Parts Per Trillion). The global migration test is conducted
periodically on all food-grade paper and paperboards
for compliance with the US FDA standards and to adhere
to prescribed limits for presence of heavy metals. All
manufacturing ingredients for applications involving direct/
indirect food contact are procured from reputed suppliers
and conform to US FDA and equivalent standards.
The Business ensures that the components of food allergens
listed in the EC directive 2003/89/EC and the US FDA Act
are not used in any virgin grade boards and papers. The
Bollaram Unit, which manufactures food grade board for
direct food contact, is ‘third party’ certified in accordance
with BRC/IoP (British Retail Consortium/Institute of
Packaging) standards. Smithers Pira, a renowned testing
and consultancy firm, certifies ITC’s ‘Indobarr’ and ‘Cyber
Propac’ brands to be compliant with German BFR standards
for Food Packaging.

Matches and Agarbatti

Chemicals approved by IFRA (International Fragrance
Resource Association, Geneva) are used to prepare
fragrances, which are required in the manufacture of
dipped Mangaldeep agarbattis. The manufacturing
processes of the Matches and Agarbatti Business are
designed to ensure product safety and consistency.

169

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Product
Information and
Labelling
As an organisation committed to high
standards of transparency and good
governance, ITC’s Business operations
comply with every relevant law of the Nation.
Systems have also been put in place to
ensure compliance before the launch of any
new category or product.
A regular customer feedback system forms
an integral part of ITC’s Businesses where
there is direct interface with customers. The
process followed by ITC’s Hotels Business
with respect to consumer feedback is
illustrated on the next page.
In the case of FMCG products, consumers are
provided several communication channels

170

like email, telephone number, website
address and feedback forms to enable
them to contact the relevant Business.
Processes are laid down to ensure that
consumers are provided with responses on
their feedback in a timely manner. For food
products, all information about ingredients
and nutrition of products is published on the
product packaging as per relevant statutory
requirements.
In the Information Technology Business,
formal mechanisms are in place to measure
customer experience. The Customer Service
Satisfaction Survey is an annual check on the
robustness of the engagement, culminating
in a Customer Experience Index. The survey
is conducted amongst Chief Executives
and Senior Management, and is based on
a structured questionnaire customised for
the stakeholder. Multiple parameters and
business outcomes are measured including

Social
Performance

Reports
Analysed

Scores are generated
for the hotel and
the individual
departments

Improvements
Identified and
Implemented

Data is analysed
to identify areas of
improvement

Scores are
compared against
targets set

satisfaction, loyalty, advocacy and value
for money. The outcomes and insights from
the survey drive customer engagement and
service delivery improvement initiatives at
the organisation, geography, Business, Unit
and account level.
Customer feedback for B2B businesses like
Agri Business and Packaging and Printing,
is obtained through different activities.
For example, Agri Business has pre-season
engagement with customers, client visits and
engagement of the Divisional Management
Committees with major customers. Given
the nature of the Business, claims due to
rejections on account of quality are a valuable
indicator of customer dissatisfaction. During
the year under review, no such claims were
made to the Business.
In addition, an independent survey “Nielsen
Corporate
Image
monitor
2014-15”,
which tracks the reputation of 42 leading
Indian companies, rated ITC well ahead of
competition in various product parameters
like “products or services – high quality
& reliable” and “customer service levels/
Customer Relationship Management”. This is
an outcome of our dedicated efforts towards

Monitored
and Verified

Scores are monitored
to ensure that
corrective action has
been effective

Audits are conducted
to check efficacy of
the changes

continuously improving the product quality
and service delivery, based on the insights
from interactions with customers and
independent surveys.

Traceability in the Foods Supply
Chain
In Foods Business, wheat constitutes around
40% of the total raw material procurement
value and is sourced through the e-Choupal
platform of ITC’s Agri Business thereby
ensuring 100% traceability to the origin.
For vendors of other raw materials including
generic and actively traded commodities like
maida, sugar, oil etc. sourced outside the
aforesaid platform, ITC has a robust system
of due diligence. In addition Board approved
policies of ITC supplemented by a ‘Code of
Conduct for Vendors and Service providers’
provide the structure for addressing
traceability within the supply chain and also
the sustainability aspects therein, which
are detailed in the “Supply Chain” section
of this Report. Monitoring of compliance
against the above mentioned Code and also
performance of Foods Business’s supply
chain partners based on identified material
aspects will be done in a phased manner.

In Foods Business,
wheat constitutes
around 40% of the
total raw material
procurement value
and is sourced
through the
e-Choupal platform
of ITC’s Agri
Business thereby
ensuring 100%
traceability to the
origin

171

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Marketing
Communications
All Businesses/Divisions of ITC have
established rigorous systems, procedures
and review mechanisms to identify and
comply with the laws and regulations
concerning marketing communications. In
addition, ITC has put in place a dedicated
consumer response cell in order to answer
any queries on products.

ITC follows
standard operating
procedures to
ensure that
its marketing
communications
are in accordance
with voluntary
codes adopted by
each business as
well as applicable
statutes

172

ITC follows standard operating procedures
to ensure that its marketing communications
are in accordance with voluntary codes
adopted by each business as well as
applicable statutes. These are vetted by
the internal legal team and compliance is
ensured by the internal audit department.
Marketing and Advertising Communications
of all ITC’s Businesses are subjected to
stringent internal checks by the Legal
Department. The Company’s consumer
goods Businesses adhere to voluntary and
legal codes of conduct and follow the ASCI
(Advertising Standards Council of India)
Code for all marketing communications.
Marketing communications for ITC’s Hotels
Business is governed by self-regulation and
guided by the Indian Society of Advertisers
(ISA) rules and guidelines.

Customer Privacy
Maintenance of customer privacy is relevant
primarily for ITC’s Information Technology
and Hotels Businesses, both of which have
well established systems and procedures
for ensuring zero non-compliance.
Network Architecture and Information
security controls of the Company’s
Information Technology Business under
ITC Infotech Limited are driven by industry
best practices. The Business has drafted a
privacy policy in line with the IT Act, 2000,
that covers all aspects of data privacy
with respect to sensitive information. The
Business has also formulated an Information
Management policy, which caters to the
IT security aspects of the ISO 27001 ISMS
framework. The IT operations arm of ITC
Infotech Limited is ISO 27001 certified for
its business processes to deliver IT services
and projects. Documented procedures are
available and practised to grant physical
access to information, e.g. the defined
and restricted access rights to IT Room/
Server Room and User Access Management
based on ISO 27001 and as agreed with
customers. The Business has also put in
place measures at various control areas in
order to meet customers’ requirements for
data security. These include desktop access,

Social
Performance
server access, network access, operating
system, application security, data transfer,
penetration testing, etc. Clear guidelines are
provided for data backup, retention periods,
the media on which backups have to be
maintained and storage at remote location.
In addition, stringent risk assessments are
carried out to identify vulnerabilities and
threats to assets and the controls that need
to be put in place.
ITC’s Hotels and Information Technology
Businesses
received
no
complaints
regarding breach of customer privacy or loss
of customer data in 2014-15. For the year
the average WoW Ratio (Guest Satisfaction
Index) for the Hotels Business was 91.5%.

Compliance
All Businesses/Divisions of ITC have well
established systems, procedures and review
mechanisms to identify and comply with
the laws and regulations concerning its
products and services. Particular care is
accorded to tobacco products, taking into
account the regulatory framework.
ITC has established systems wherein
every Business and Corporate Department
has to submit a periodic statutory
compliance report to the CMC/Board on
all business, regulatory, product specific,
finance/revenue
related,
personnel
related, technical/process related and
environment related statutes and other
applicable laws and regulations. This is
done on the basis of updated checklists
that have to be mandatorily maintained by

each reporting Unit/Business/function
as well as monitoring and controlling
systems that the Business/Corporate
function must have in place.
As per this system, no incidents of noncompliance were reported during 2014-15.

The Road Ahead
Recognising the unique construct of ITC in
terms of its strong presence in agriculture,
Branded Packaged Foods and Personal
Care Products Businesses, a convergence
of R&D capabilities is being leveraged to
deliver future products aimed at nutrition,
health and well-being. In this context, Life
Sciences & Technology Centre (LSTC) has
created a Biosciences R&D team to design
and develop several long-term research
platforms
evolving
multi-generation
product concepts and associated claims that
are fully backed by scientific evidence for
the Branded Packaged Foods and Personal
Care Products Businesses. Multiple value
propositions have been identified in the
area of functional foods, which are being
progressed to products of the future with
strong scientifically validated claims via
clinical trials. Similar advances have been
made in the area of personal care products.
In addition, LSTC has evolved a strategy in
building a new value chain called, ‘Nutrition’
with a special focus on ‘Indianness’ and
‘health and well-being’ founded on the
basis of Value Added Agriculture (VAA)
and Medicinal and Aromatic Plants. The
initial activities related to VAA have already
commenced with a focus on soya.

A convergence of
R&D capabilities
is being leveraged
to deliver future
products aimed at
nutrition, health
and well-being.
In this context,
Life Sciences &
Technology Centre
(LSTC) has created
a Biosciences R&D
team

173

Sustainable
Livelihoods

GRI -G4 Content Index
GRI - G4 Disclosures

UNGC - COP #
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Section
Reference

G4-1

Statement from the most
senior decision-maker of
the organisation about the
relevance of sustainability
to the organisation and the
organisation’s strategy for
addressing sustainability

Statement of
continuing support

04-09

-

-

G4-2

Description of key impacts, risks,
and opportunities

*

38-45

-

-

General Standard Disclosures
Indicator

Description

Strategy and Analysis

Organisational Profile

174

G4-3

Name of the organisation

*

12

-

-

G4-4

Primary brands, products, and
services

*

14-23

-

-

G4-5

Location of the organisation’s
headquarters

*

49

-

-

G4-6

Number of countries where the
organisation operates

*

12

-

-

G4-7

Nature of ownership and legal
form

*

Report and Accounts
2015

-

-

G4-8

Markets served

*

12

-

-

G4-9

Scale of the organisation

*

12

-

-

G4-10

Details on workforce broken
down by gender, employment
contract, employment type etc.

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 6

131

-

-

G4-11

Percentage of total employees
covered by collective bargaining
agreements

Outcomes from
implementation of
Principle 3

131

-

-

G4-12

Description of the organisation’s
supply chain

*

24-29

-

-

GRI -G4
Content Index

GRI - G4 Disclosures
General Standard Disclosures

UNGC - COP #
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Section
Reference

Indicator

Description

G4-13

Significant changes during the
reporting period regarding the
organisation’s size, structure,
ownership, or its supply chain

*

12-23

-

-

G4-14

How the precautionary approach
or principle is addressed by the
organisation

Actions taken to
implement
Principle 7

61

-

-

G4-15

Externally developed economic,
environmental and social
charters, principles, or other
initiatives to which the
organisation subscribes or which
it endorses

United Nations
Global Compact
(UNGC) - This
Sustainability
Report is used
to communicate
progress on
implementation of
UNGC Principles

04

-

-

G4-16

Memberships of associations
and national/ international
advocacy organisations in which
the organisation holds a position
on the governance body and
participates in projects
or committees

*

198-199

-

-

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

Identified Material Aspects and Boundaries

G4-17

Entities included in the
organisation’s consolidated
financial statements with
indication of coverage
in the report

G4-18

Process for defining the
report content and the
Aspect Boundaries

G4-19

Material Aspects identified
in the process for defining
report content

G4-20

Description of Aspect Boundary
within the organisation for each
material aspect

*

*

*

*

49-53

46

46-47

49-51

175

Sustainable
Livelihoods

GRI - G4 Disclosures
General Standard Disclosures
Indicator

Description

G4-21

Description of Aspect Boundary
outside the organisation for each
material aspect

G4-22

Explanation of the effect of any
re-instatement of information
provided in the earlier Reports

G4-23

Significant changes from
previous reporting periods in the
Scope and Aspect Boundaries

UNGC - COP #
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

*

25-26,
35-38,
49, 83,
87-88,
91, 95,
115

*

*

90

49-51

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Section
Reference

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

Stakeholder Engagement

176

G4-24

List of stakeholder groups
engaged by the organisation

Sharing COP with
Stakeholders

G4-25

Basis for identification and
selection of stakeholders with
whom to engage

Sharing COP with
Stakeholders

G4-26

Organisation’s approach to
stakeholder engagement

Sharing COP with
Stakeholders

36-37

35

35-37

GRI -G4
Content Index

GRI - G4 Disclosures
General Standard Disclosures
Indicator

Description

G4-27

Key topics and concerns that
have been raised through
stakeholder engagement,
and how the organisation has
responded to those key topics
and concerns

UNGC - COP #
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Section
Reference

Sharing COP with
Stakeholders

36-37, 47

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

Report Profile
G4-28

Reporting Period

*

49

-

-

G4-29

Date of most recent previous
Report

*

49

-

-

G4-30

Reporting cycle

*

49

-

-

G4-31

Contact point for questions
regarding the report or its
contents

*

49

-

-

G4-32

GRI Content Index

*

174-194

-

-

G4-33

Organisation’s policy and
current practice with regard to
seeking external assurance for
the report; relationship with the
assurance providers; the highest
governance body's involvement
in seeking assurance for
the organisation’s
sustainability report

*

49

-

-

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

Governance

G4-34

Governance structure of the
organisation; committees
responsible for decision-making
on economic, environmental and
social impacts

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1-10

G4-35

Process for delegating authority
for economic, environmental and
social topics from the highest
governance body to senior
executives and other employees

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1-10

55-58

57

177

Sustainable
Livelihoods

GRI - G4 Disclosures

UNGC - COP #
Elements

Indicator

Description

Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

G4-36

Executive-level positions with
responsibility for economic,
environmental and social topics

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1-10

G4-37

Processes for consultation
between stakeholders and the
highest governance body on
economic, environmental and
social topics

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1-10

G4-38

Composition of the highest
governance body and its
committees

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1-10

G4-39

Function of the Chair of the
highest governance body within
the organisation's management
and the reasons for his
arrangement as an executive
officer

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1-10

G4-40

Nomination and selection
processes for the highest
governance body and its
committees; the criteria used
for nominating and selecting
highest governance body
members

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1-10

G4-41

Processes for the highest
governance body to ensure
conflicts of interest are avoided
and managed; disclosure
of conflicts of interest to
stakeholders

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1 -10

G4-42

Highest governance body’s and
senior executives’ roles in the
development, approval, and
updating of the organisation’s
purpose, value or mission
statements, strategies, policies,
and goals related to economic,
environmental and social
impacts

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1-10

G4-43

Measures taken to develop and
enhance the highest governance
body’s collective knowledge of
economic, environmental and
social topics

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1-10

General Standard Disclosures

178

Page Number/
Explanation

55-57

57

56-58

58

55-58

58-59

57

59

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Section
Reference

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

GRI -G4
Content Index

GRI - G4 Disclosures
General Standard Disclosures

UNGC - COP #
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

Indicator

Description

G4-44

Processes for evaluation of
the highest governance body’s
performance with respect
to governance of economic,
environmental and social topics;
actions taken in response to
evaluation results

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1-10

G4-45

Highest governance body’s
role in the identification
and management of
economic, environmental
and social impacts, risks, and
opportunities; use of stakeholder
consultation for supporting the
process

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1-10

G4-46

Highest governance body’s role
in reviewing the effectiveness
of the organisation’s risk
management processes for
economic, environmental and
social topics

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1-10

G4-47

Frequency of the highest
governance body’s review
of economic, environmental
and social impacts, risks, and
opportunities

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1-10

G4-48

Highest committee or position
that formally reviews and
approves the organisation’s
sustainability report and ensures
that all material Aspects are
covered

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1-10

G4-49

Process for communicating
critical concerns to the highest
governance body

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1-10

G4-50

Nature and total number of
critical concerns that were
communicated to the highest
governance body and the
mechanism(s) used to address
and resolve them

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1-10

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Section
Reference

59

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

61

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

57, 61

Once in a quarter

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

46, 57

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

46

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

36-45

-

-

179

Sustainable
Livelihoods

GRI - G4 Disclosures
General Standard Disclosures

UNGC - COP #
Elements
Actions and
Outcomes on
Implementation of
Principles

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance/
Section
Reference

Indicator

Description

G4-51

Remuneration policies for
the highest governance body
and senior executives; how
performance criteria in the
remuneration policy relate to
the highest governance body’s
and senior executives’ economic,
environmental and social
objectives

Actions taken
to implement
principles 1-10

59-60

G4-52

Process for determining
remuneration

*

59-60

G4-53

How stakeholders’ views are
sought and taken into account
regarding remuneration

*

Report and Accounts
2015

G4-54

Ratio of the annual total
compensation for the
organisation’s highest-paid
individual to the median
annual total compensation for
all employees (excluding the
highest-paid individual)

*

60

-

-

G4-55

Ratio of percentage increase
in annual total compensation
for the organisation’s highestpaid individual to the median
percentage increase in annual
total compensation for all
employees (excluding the
highest-paid individual)

*

60

-

-

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

-

-

Ethics and Integrity

180

G4-56

Organisation’s values, principles,
standards and norms of behavior
such as codes of conduct and
codes of ethics

Actions taken
to implement
principles 10

G4-57

Internal and external
mechanisms for seeking
advice on ethical and lawful
behavior, and matters related to
organisational integrity

Actions taken
to implement
principles 10

60-61

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

G4-58

Internal and external
mechanisms for reporting
concerns about unethical or
unlawful behavior, and matters
related to organisational
integrity

Actions taken
to implement
principles 10

60-61

-

-

60-61, 196

GRI -G4
Content Index

UNGC - COP# Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
DMA and
Indicators

Description

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

Category: Economic
Material Aspect: Economic Performance
G4-DMA

Generic Disclosures on
Management Approach
(DMA)

*

64

-

-

G4-EC1

Direct economic value
generated and distributed

*

65-69

-

-

-

G4-EC2

Financial implications and
other risks and opportunities
for the organisation's
activities due to climate
change

Action taken on
Principle 7

-

We have not disclosed
the information on
this indicator owing
to unavailability
of appropriate
framework and
reliable information
needed for
representative
estimation of the
financial implications
of the risk or
opportunity. We will
evaluate appropriate
framework for
complete disclosure
on this indicator
within next 3-4 years.

G4-EC3

Coverage of the
organisation's defined
benefit plan obligations

*

71

-

-

G4-EC4

Financial assistance received
from government

*

70

-

-

Material Aspect: Indirect Economic Impacts
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

*

72-73

-

-

G4-EC7

Development and impact of
infrastructure investments
and services supported

*

73

-

-

181

Sustainable
Livelihoods

UNGC - COP# Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
DMA and
Indicators

Description

G4-EC8

Significant indirect economic
impacts, including the extent
of impacts

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

*

146-161

-

-

Material Aspect: Procurement Practices
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

*

69-70

-

-

G4-EC9

Proportion of spending on
local suppliers

*

69

-

-

Actions taken
to implement
principles 7, 8, 9

76-77

-

-

117-118,
121

-

-

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

Category: Environmental
G4-DMA

Generic Disclosures on
Management Approach
(DMA)

Material Aspect: Materials
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
principles 7, 8

G4-EN1

Materials used by weight or
volume

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 7, 8

G4-EN2

Percentage of materials
used that are recycled input
materials

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8

119-120

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

79, 83

-

-

119-121

Material Aspect: Energy
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
principles 7, 8, 9

G4-EN3

Energy consumption within
the organisation

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 7, 8

80-82

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

G4-EN4

Energy consumption outside
of the organisation

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8

83

-

-

Energy intensity

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

G4-EN5

182

82

GRI -G4
Content Index

UNGC - COP# Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
DMA and
Indicators

Description

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

G4-EN6

Reduction of energy
consumption

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8, 9

82

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

G4-EN7

Reductions in energy
requirements of products and
services

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8,9

82

-

-

97-98,
107

-

-

Material Aspect: Water
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
principles 7, 8

G4-EN8

Total water withdrawal by
source

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 7, 8

99

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

G4-EN9

Water sources significantly
affected by withdrawal of
water

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8

107

-

-

G4-EN10

Percentage and total volume
of water recycled and reused

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8

102, 106

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

-

-

Material Aspect: Biodiversity
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
principles 8

123, 125

G4-EN11

Operational sites owned,
leased, managed in, or
adjacent to, protected areas
and areas of high biodiversity
value outside protected areas

-

-

G4-EN12

Description of significant
impacts of activities,
products, and services on
biodiversity in protected areas
and areas of high biodiversity
value outside protected areas

-

-

G4-EN13

Habitats protected or restored

-

-

G4-EN14

Total number of IUCN Red
List species and national
conservation list species with
habitats in areas affected
by operations, by level of
extinction risk

-

-

None of ITC's
operational sites
are owned, leased,
managed in, or are
adjacent to, protected
areas and areas of
high diversity value,
therefore, these
standard disclosures
are not applicable

-

-

-

183

Sustainable
Livelihoods

UNGC - COP# Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
DMA and
Indicators

Description

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

85-86,
95

-

-

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement;
Independent
Assurance
Statement
on GHG
Inventory

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement;
Independent
Assurance
Statement
on GHG
Inventory

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement;
Independent
Assurance
Statement
on GHG
Inventory

Material Aspect: Emissions
G4-DMA

G4-EN15

G4-EN16

G4-EN17

184

Aspect-specific DMA

Direct greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions (Scope 1)

Energy indirect greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions (Scope
2)

Other indirect greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions (Scope
3)

Actions taken
to implement
principles 7, 8, 9

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 7, 8

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 7, 8

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 7, 8

87

87

87, 91

G4-EN18

Greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions intensity

Outcomes on
Principle 7, 8, 9

90

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement;
Independent
Assurance
Statement
on GHG
Inventory

G4-EN19

Reduction of greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions

Outcomes on
Principle 7, 8, 9

88

-

-

G4-EN20

Emissions of ozone-depleting
substances (ODS)

Outcomes on
Principle 7, 8

94

-

-

GRI -G4
Content Index

UNGC - COP# Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
DMA and
Indicators

Description

G4-EN21

NOX, SOX, and other
significant air emissions

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

Outcomes on
Principle 7, 8

92-94

-

-

97-98,
107,
109,
115

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

Material Aspect: Effluents and Waste

G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
principles 8

G4-EN22

Total water discharge by
quality and destination

Outcomes from
implementing
principle 8

G4-EN23

Total weight of waste by type
and disposal method

Outcomes from
implementing
principle 8

110, 112

-

G4-EN24

Total number and volume of
significant spills

Outcomes from
implementing
principle 8

95

-

G4-EN25

Weight of transported,
imported, exported, or treated
waste deemed hazardous
under the terms of the Basel
Convention Annex I, II, III,
and VIII, and percentage of
transported waste shipped
internationally

-

This Standard
Disclosure is not
applicable as there
was no transport,
import, export, or
treatment of waste
deemed hazardous
under the terms of
the Basel Convention
Annex I, II, III and IV.

Outcomes from
implementing
principle 8

102-104

-

185

Sustainable
Livelihoods

UNGC - COP# Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
DMA and
Indicators

Description

G4-EN26

Identity, size, protected
status, and biodiversity
value of water bodies and
related habitats signifcantly
affected by the organisation's
discharges of water and
runoff

Outcomes from
implementing
principle 8

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

107

-

82

-

-

We are using 1,14,563
tonnes of post
consumer waste
paper/ paperboard
which contribues
to 22% of total
fibre demand of our
Paperboards and
Specialty Papers
Business. However
we are not able to
correlate the post
consumer waste
coming from the
consumers of our
products. For further
details, please refer
to "Raw Materials"
section of this Report.

117-118, 121,
123, 125

-

External
Assurance

Material Aspect: Products and Services
G4-EN27

G4-EN28

Extent of impact mitigation
of environmental impacts of
products and services

Percentage of products
sold and their packaging
materials that are reclaimed
by category

Outcomes from
implementing
Principles 7, 8, 9

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8

-

Material Aspect: Sustainable Forest Management
DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
principles 7, 8, 9

Material Aspect: Compliance

G4-EN29

Monetary value of significant
fines and total number of
non-monetary sanctions
for non-compliance with
environmental laws and
regulations

Outcomes from
implementing
Principle 8

173

-

Outcomes from
implementing
Principles 7, 8

87-88, 91

-

Material Aspect: Transport

G4-EN30

186

Significant environmental
impacts of transporting
products and other goods
and materials for the
organisation's operations,
and transporting members of
the workforce

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

GRI -G4
Content Index

UNGC - COP# Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
DMA and
Indicators

Page Number/
Explanation

Description

Omissions

External
Assurance

Category: Social
Sub-Category: Labor Practices And Decent Work
Material Aspect: Employment

G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
Principle
3, 4, 5, 6

G4-LA1

Total number and rates of
new employee hires and
employee turnover by age
group, gender and region

Outcomes from
implementation
of Principle 6

G4-LA2

Benefits provided to fulltime employees that are
not provided to temporary
or part-time employees,
by significant locations of
operation

G4-LA3

Return to work and retention
rates after parental leave, by
gender

Outcomes from
implementation
of Principle 6

129-130,
134-135

-

131-132

-

132-133

-

131

-

Minimum notice
periods regarding
operational
changes form
part of long term
agreements with
employees.

-

137, 143

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

Material Aspect: Labor/Management Relations

G4-LA4

Minimum notice periods
regarding operational
changes, including whether
these are specified in
collective agreements

Outcomes from
implementation
of Principle 3

-

Material Aspect: Occupational Health and Safety

G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

187

Sustainable
Livelihoods

UNGC - COP# Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
DMA and
Indicators

Description

Page Number/
Explanation

G4-LA5

Percentage of total workforce
represented in formal joint
management-worker health
and safety committees that
help monitor and advise on
occupational health and
saftey programs

As per ITC's
Corporate
guidelines, every
Unit is required
to have EHS
committees to
promote active
participation of
employees
and service
providers in EHS
management.
The committees
have equal
representation
from workers and
management.

G4-LA6

Type of injury and rates of
injury, occupational diseases,
lost days, and absenteeism,
and total number of workrelated fatalities

*

G4-LA7

Workers with high incidence
or high risk of diseases
related to their occupation

G4-LA8

Omissions

External
Assurance

138-142

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

*

142

-

*

During the
reporting year,
5 long term
agreements were
signed with trade
unions. Health
and safety topics
were covered
in each of these
agreements.

-

*

Health and safety topics
covered in formal agreements
with trade unions

Material Aspect: Training and Education

188

G4-LA9

Average hours of training per
year per employee by gender,
and by employee category

Outcomes from
implementation
of Principle 6

133

-

G4-LA10

Programs for skills
management and lifelong
learning that support the
continued employability of
employees and assist them in
managing career endings

*

133

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

GRI -G4
Content Index

UNGC - COP# Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
DMA and
Indicators

Description

G4-LA11

Percentage of employees
receiving regular
performance and career
development reviews, by
gender and by employee
category

Outcomes from
implementation
of Principle 6

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

133

-

56, 131

-

129, 134-135

-

External
Assurance

Material Aspect: Diversity and Equal Opportunity

G4-LA12

Composition of governance
bodies and breakdown of
employees per employee
Outcomes from
category according to gender, implementation
age group, minority group
of Principle 6
membership, and other
indicators of diversity

Sub-Category: Human Rights

G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
Principles
1, 24, 5

Material Aspect: Non-Discrimination

G4-HR3

Total number of incidents of
discrimination and corrective
actions taken

Outcomes from
implementation
of Principle 6

135

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

Material Aspect: Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining

G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

G4-HR4

Operations and suppliers
identified in which the
right to exercise freedom of
association and collective
bargaining may be violated
or at significant risk, and
measures taken to support
these rights

Outcomes from
implementation
of Principle 3

129, 134-135

-

135

-

189

Sustainable
Livelihoods

UNGC - COP# Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
DMA and
Indicators

Description

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

135

-

135

-

External
Assurance

Material Aspect: Child Labor

G4-HR5

Operations and suppliers
identified as having
significant risk for incidents
of child labor, and measures
taken to contribute to the
effective abolition of child
labor

Outcomes from
implementation
of Principle 5

Material Aspect: Forced or Compulsory Labor

G4-HR6

Operations and suppliers
identified as having
significant risk for incidents Outcomes from
of forced or compulsory labor, implementation
and measures to contribute
of Principle 4
to the elimination of all forms
of forced or compulsory labor

Sub-Category: Society
Material Aspect: Local Communities
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions to
implement
Principles 1, 2

G4-SO1

Percentage of operations
with implemented local
community engagement,
impact assessments, and
development programs

Outcomes of
implementation
of Principle 1, 2

G4-SO2

Operations with significant
Outcomes of
actual and potential negative implementation
impacts on local communities of Principle 1, 2

145-147, 161

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

147-160

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

147-160

Material Aspect: Anti-Corruption

190

G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
Principle 10

60-61

-

G4-SO3

Total number and percentage
of operations asessed for
risks related to corruption
and the significant risks
identified

Outcomes of
implementation
of Principle 10

60-61

-

G4-SO4

Communication and training
on anti-corruption policies
and procedures

Outcomes of
implementation
of Principle 10

60-61

-

GRI -G4
Content Index

UNGC - COP# Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
DMA and
Indicators

Description

G4-SO5

Confirmed incidents of
corruption and actions taken

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

Outcomes of
implementation
of Principle 10

60-61

-

-

External
Assurance

Material Aspect: Public Policy
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

Actions taken
to implement
Principle 10

162

G4-SO6

Total value of political
contributions by country and
recipient/beneficiary

Outcomes of
implementation
of Principle 10

Nil

Material Aspect: Anti-Competitive Behavior
G4-SO7

Total number of legal actions
for anti-competitive behavior,
anti-trust, and monopoly
practices and their outcomes

*

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

173

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

165, 173

-

173

Material Aspect: Compliance

G4-SO8

Monetary value of significant
fines and total number of
non-monetary sanctions for
non-compliance with laws
and regulations

*

Sub-Category: Product Responsibility
Material Aspect: Customer Health and Safety
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

*

G4-PR1

Percentage of significant
product and service
categories for which health
and safety impacts are
assessed for improvement

*

165-169

-

G4-PR2

Total number of incidents
of non-compliance with
regulations and voluntary
codes concerning the
health and safety impacts of
products and services during
their life cycle, by type of
outcomes

*

173

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

191

Sustainable
Livelihoods

UNGC - COP# Elements

GRI - G4 Disclosures
Specific Standard Disclosures
DMA and
Indicators

Description

Page Number/
Explanation

Omissions

External
Assurance

Material Aspect: Product and Service Labeling
G4-DMA

Aspect-specific DMA

*

170

-

G4-PR3

Type of product and service
information required by the
organisation's procedures
for product and service
information and labeling,
and percentage of significant
product and service
categories subject to such
information requirements

*

170

-

G4-PR4

Total number of incidents
of non-compliance with
regulations and voluntary
codes concerning product
and service information and
labeling, by type of outcomes

*

173

-

G4-PR5

Results of surveys measuring
customer satisfaction

*

170-171

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

172-173

-

-

Yes/
Independent
Assurance
Statement

Material Aspect: Marketing Communications
G4-PR6

Sale of banned or disputed
products

G4-PR7

Total number of incidents
of non-compliance with
regulations and voluntary
codes concerning marketing
communications, including
advertising, promotion,
and sponsorship, by type of
outcomes

*

*

173

-

*

172-173

-

*

173

-

Material Aspect: Customer Privacy
G4-PR8

Total number of substantiated
complaints regarding
breaches of customer privacy
and losses of customer data

Material Aspect: Compliance
G4-PR9

Monetary value of significant
fines for non-compliance
with laws and regulations
concerning the provision and
use of products and services

* No direct requirement by UNGC - COP
# UNGC - COP - United Nations Global Compact - Communication of progress

192

GRI-G4 Food Processing
Sector Supplement

GRI-G4 Food Processing
Sector Supplement (FPSS)
Material Aspects DMAs and Indicators

Description

Reasons for
Omissions

Page Number/ Explanation

External
Assurance

Aspect: Procurement/Sourcing Practices - Disclosure on Management Approach (DMA)
DMA

Protecting Natural
Resources

76-77

-

DMA

Minimising Toxicity

117-121,
165-169

-

DMA

Fair Trade

All of ITC’s trading
partnerships are conducted
in compliance with
applicable legislations

-

DMA

Fair Compensation for Labor

132

-

DMA

Traceability

171

-

Aspect: Procurement/Sourcing Practices - Disclosure on Management Approach (DMA)
DMA

Genetically Modified
Organisms (GMOs)

ITC Foods business does
not use any GMOs in
manufacturing its products

-

DMA

Biofuels

79, 83

-

Reporting on energy,
GHG emissions,
water and waste
performance of Foods
business third party
manufacturing units
(TPMs) is intended
to be done in a
progressive manner.
Joint venture North
Eastern Nutrients
Private Limited
is proposed to be
included in ITC
Sustainability Report
2016.

Aspect: Procurement/Sourcing Practices - Indicators
FP1

Percentage of purchased
volume from suppliers
compliant with company’s
sourcing policy

Partially reported
25, 171

FP2

Percentage of purchased
volume which is verified as
being in accordance with
credible, internationally
recognised responsible
production standards,
broken down by standard

Partially reported
25, 171

Aspect: Labor/Management Relations
DMA

129-130

-

193

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Material Aspects DMAs and Indicators
FP3

Description

Page Number/ Explanation

Percentage of working
time lost due to industrial
disputes, strikes and/or
lock-outs by country

131

Reasons for
Omissions

-

Aspect: Healthy and Affordable Food
DMA

Nature, scope and
effectiveness of any
programs and practices that
promote access to healthy
lifestyles; the prevention
of chronic disease; access
to healthy, nutritious
and affordable food; and
improved welfare for
communities in need

165
-

Aspect: Customer Health and Safety
DMA
FP5

165
Percentage of production
volume manufactured
in sites certified by an
independent third party
according to internationally
recognised food safety
management system
standards

166

Percentage of total sales
volume of consumer
products, by product
category, that are lowered
in saturated fat, transfats,
sodium and sugars

166

Percentage of total sales
volume of consumer
products, by product
category sold, that contain
increased fiber, vitamins,
minerals, phytochemicals or
functional food additives

166

FP6

FP7

-

-

-

-

Aspect: Product and Service Labelling
DMA

Policies and practices
on communication
to consumers about
ingredients and nutritional
information beyond legal
requirements

170

Aspect: Animal Welfare
Not material as none of our businesses are involved in activities related to animal welfare

194

-

External
Assurance

Business Responsibility
Report Principles

Alignment to Business
Responsibility Report Principles
Linking Sustainability Report 2015 to Business Responsibility Report Principles to assess compliance with Environmental,
Social and Governance (ESG) norms.
Principle

Business Responsibility Report Principles to
assess compliance with ESG norms

1

Businesses should conduct and govern themselves
with Ethics, Transparency and Accountability

2

Businesses should provide goods and services that are
safe and contribute to sustainability throughout
their life cycle

3

Businesses should promote the well-being
of all employees

4

Businesses should respect the interests of, and
be responsive towards all stakeholders, especially
those who are disadvantaged, vulnerable
and marginalised

5

Businesses should respect and promote
human rights

6

Business should respect, protect, and make
efforts to restore the environment

7

8
9

Businesses, when engaged in influencing
public and regulatory policy, should do so in a
responsible manner
Businesses should support inclusive growth and
equitable development
Businesses should engage with and provide
value to their customers and consumers in a
responsible manner

Coverage in Section of Sustainability
Report 2015
	 Governance Structure

l

	Energy
	 Air Emissions
l	 Water Management
l	 Recycling and Waste Management
l	 Raw Materials
l	 Supply Chain
l	 Social Investments - Mission Sunehra Kal
l	 Product Responsibility
l
l

	 Labour Practices & Decent Work and
Human Rights
l	 Occupational Health and Safety
l

	 Economic Performance
	 Stakeholder Engagement, Risks &
Opportunities and Materiality Analysis
l	 Labour Practices & Decent Work and
Human Rights
l	 Social Investments - Mission Sunehra Kal
l
l

	 Labour Practices & Decent Work and
Human Rights

l

	Energy
	 Air Emissions
l	 Water Management
l	 Recycling and Waste Management
l	 Raw Materials
l	Biodiversity
l	 Social Investments - Mission Sunehra Kal
l
l

	 Responsible Policy Advocacy
	 Stakeholder Engagement, Risks &
Opportunities and Materiality Analysis
l	 Memberships and Affiliations
l
l

	 Economic Performance
	 Social Investments - Mission Sunehra Kal

l
l

	 Stakeholder Engagement, Risks &
Opportunities and Materiality Analysis
l	 Product Responsibility
l

195

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Annexure

ITC’s Vision, Mission, Core Values and
Policies & Guidelines
ITC’s Vision
Sustain ITC’s position as one of India’s most valuable corporations through world-class
performance, creating growing value for the Indian economy and the Company’s stakeholders.

ITC’s Mission
To enhance the wealth generating capability of the enterprise in a globalising environment,
delivering superior and sustainable stakeholder value.

ITC’s Core Values
ITC’s Core Values are aimed at developing a customer-focussed, high-performance
organisation which creates values for all its stakeholders. ITC’s Core Values encompass the
principles of Trusteeship, Customer Focus, Respect for People, Excellence, Innovation and
Nation Orientation. Please check the following link for details:
http://www.itcportal.com/about-itc/values/core-values.aspx

Corporate Governance at ITC
http://www.itcportal.com/about-itc/values/corporate-governance.aspx
ITC’s Code of Conduct and Policies are available at the Company’s corporate website		
www.itcportal.com. Please check the following links for details:

ITC’s Code of Conduct
http://www.itcportal.com/about-itc/values/code-of-conduct.aspx

ITC’s Sustainability Policies
http://www.itcportal.com/about-itc/policies/sustainability-policy.aspx

ITC’s CSR Policy
http://www.itcportal.com/about-itc/policies/corporate-social-responsibility-policy.aspx

ITC’s Food Products Policy
http://www.itcportal.com/about-itc/policies/itc-food-product-policy.aspx

ITC’s E-Waste Policy
http://www.itcportal.com/about-itc/policies/itc-it-e-waste-policy.aspx

196

Annexure

Annexure

GHG Inventory: Quantification
Methodologies-Energy and GHG Emissions
1.	 Stationary Combustion
Emission factors provided in the IPCC Guideline
for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories of 2006
were used to calculate GHG emissions from
stationary combustion sources.
Activity data (quantity of fuel consumed) is
multiplied with the respective default energy
factor or actual measured Net Calorific Value
(NCVs) to arrive at the energy consumption
values, which is multiplied by the emission factor
to quantify the direct emission from stationary
combustion sources.

2.	 Purchased Energy
The quantification of indirect GHG emission
due to purchased electricity is based on
activity data (Electricity consumption in kWh)
multiplied by emission factors specified in the
‘CO2 Baseline Database for the Indian Power
Sector User Guide’, (version 10.0, December
2014) issued by Central Electricity Authority,
Government of India.
The quantification of indirect GHG emissions
for purchased steam is based on activity data
(energy consumption in GJ) multiplied by the
applicable emission factors provided in the
IPCC Guideline for National Greenhouse Gas
Inventories of 2006.

3. Transportation
The energy consumption outside of the
organisation due to road transportation is
quantified by using energy conversion factors
based on the Report by World Bank on Road
Transport Service Efficiency Study (India)–2005.
The modes of transportation used in ITC, for raw
materials, finished goods & wastes, and sources
for calculation of emission factors are as follows:
Road – Emission factors for trucks are calculated
based on the Report by World Bank on Road
Transport Service Efficiency Study (India)–2005.
Emission factors for employee commuting by
means of company owned/hired vehicles and
transportation due to guest pick-up in ITC Hotels
are based on a report by Automotive Research
Association of India.

Rail – Emission factors are calculated based
on the information available from the Indian
Railways Annual report 2013-14, Indian Railways
Statistics 2013-14.
Air/Ship – “Guidelines to DEFRA/DECC’s GHG
Conversion Factors for Company Reporting
– Freight Transport 2011” developed by the
Department of Energy and Climate Change
(DECC) and the Department for Environment,
Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA), U.K.

4. GHG Removals
GHG removals from plantations have been
calculated based on the approved methodology
used in ITC’s UNFCCC registered CDM project
‘2241: Reforestation of severely degraded
landmass in Khammam District of Andhra
Pradesh, India under ITC Social Forestry
Project.’
The quantification of GHG emissions from
minor* sources is based on a robust process
of data collection at Unit/Division level and
emission factors taken from recognised
global sources, such as IPCC guidelines and
assessment reports; GHG Protocol HFC Tool
v10 developed by GHG Protocol initiative, WRI
& WBCSD; Pulp and Paper Tool-2005; UNFCCC
approved methodologies. The sources that
have a minor contribution to ITC’s overall GHG
emissions are listed below:
1. Air-conditioning
2. Process Emissions
3. Company owned vehicles
4. SF6 release from power
distribution system
5. CO2 release from fire protection system
6. Gas cutting/welding
7. Waste water treatment
8. GHG emissions from composting of waste
inside the unit premises
9. GHG emissions from fertiliser application in
forestry project

* The Frequency of quantification of GHG emissions from minor sources is once in three years

197

Sustainable
Livelihoods

Memberships &
Affiliations – 2015
	 Andhra Pradesh Forest Development
	 Corporation of India Limited

	 Fairtrade International (FLO), Germany

l

l

	 Federation of Andhra Pradesh Chambers 	 	
	 of Commerce and Industry

l

	 Agricultural & Processed Foods Export
	 Development Authority

l

	 All India Food Processors Association

	 Federation of Biscuits Manufacturers 		
	 Association of India

	 All India Management Association

l

l

l

	 Federation of Hotels & Restaurants 		
	 Association of India

l

	 Andhra Chamber of Commerce

l

	 Federation of Indian Export Organisations

l

	 Asian Packaging Federation

l

	 Federation of Indian Chambers of 		
	 Commerce and Industry

l

	 Associated Chambers of Commerce
	 & Industry

l

	 Federation of Industries and Commerce of 	
	 North Eastern Region

l

	 Associated Chambers of Commerce and
	 Industry of Uttar Pradesh

l

	 Bangalore Chamber of Industry and 		
	Commerce

l

	 Federation of Karnataka Chambers of 		
	 Commerce & Industry

l

	 Bihar Chamber of Commerce

l

	 Bihar Industries Association

l

	 Bihar State Productivity Council

l

	 Bombay Management Association

l

	 Bureau of Indian Standards

l

l

	 Gujarat Chamber of Commerce & Industry

l

	 Guwahati Management Association

l

	 Hotel Association of India

l

	 International Market Assessment
	 India Limited

	 Central Food Technology Research
	Institute

l

	 Indian Association of Tour Operators

l

	 Central Institute of Plastics Engineering &
	Technology

l

	 Indian Beauty and Hygiene Association

l

	 Chemicals & Plastics Export Council of 		
	India

l

	 Coal Consumers Association

l

	 India Convention Promotion Bureau

l

	 Coffee Board

	 Indian Flexible Packaging & Folding 		
	 Carton Manufacturers Association

l

	 Coffee Exporters Association

l

	 Cooperation Centre for Scientific 		
	 Research Relative to Tobacco
	 Confederation of Indian Industry

l

	 Ecotourism Society of India

l

	 Employee Federation of South India

l

	 Employers’ Association of Northern India

l

	 Export Inspection Council of India

l

	 Indian Chamber of Commerce and 		
	 Industry, Coimbatore

l

	 Indian Coffee Trade Association

l

l

	 Indian Chamber of Commerce Calcutta

l

l

	 Cochin Chamber of Commerce & Industry

l

198

	 Federation of Jharkhand Chambers of 		
	 Commerce & Industry

l

	

	 Indian Green Building Council

l

	 Indian Institute of Packaging

l

	 Indian Merchants’ Chamber

l

	 Indian Paper Manufacturers Association

l

	 Indian Printing Packaging and Allied 		
	 Machinery Manufacturers Association

l

	 Indian Pulp & Paper Technical Association

l

Memberships &
Affiliations - 2015
	 Indian Tobacco Association

l

	 Indian Wind Power Association

l

	 Indo American Chamber of Commerce

l

	 Indo Australian Chamber of Commerce

l

	 Indo German Chamber of Commerce

l

	 Industrial Waste Management Association

l

	 Institute of Directors

l

	 International Chamber of Commerce

l

	 International Flexible Packaging Network

l

	 International Life Science Institute

l

Tamil Nadu Electricity Consumers 		
	Association

l	

The All India Association of Industries

l	

The Bengal Chamber of Commerce & 		
	Industry

l	

The Central Organisation for Oil Industry 	 	
	 and Trade

l	

The Clothing Manufacturers Association 		
	 of India

l	

The Energy and Research Institute

l	

The Food Safety and Standards Authority 	 	
	 of India

l	

	 International Packaging Group

l	

	 Karnataka Planters Association

l	

	 Leatherhead Food International, UK

l	

l
l
l

	 Madras Chamber of Commerce & Industry

l

	 Madras Management Association

l

	 Madras Printers and Lithographers 		
	Association

l

Maharashtra Economic Development 		
	Council

l	

The Indian Chamber of Commerce, Guntur
The Indian Society of Advertisers

(ABD) The Utkal Chamber of Commerce & 		
	Industry
The Visakhapatnam Chamber of 		
	 Commerce & Industry

l	

Travel Agents Association of India

l	

United States Tour Operators Association

l	

US Food and Drug Administration

l	

	 Mahratta Chamber of Commerce, Industry 	
	 & Agriculture

l	

	 Marine Products Export Development 		
	Authority

l	

	 Multi Commodity Exchange of India 		
	Limited

l	

	 National Commodity & Derivatives 		
	 Exchange Limited

l	

l

l

l

l

	

Western UP Chamber of Commerce & 		
	Industry
World Business Council for Sustainable 		
	 Development
World Travel & Tourism Council India 		
	Initiative
World Wide Fund - Global Forest and Trade 	
	Network

	 National Council of Applied Economic 		
	Research

l

	 National Safety Council

l

	 Oil Technologists’ Association of India

l

	 Pacific Asia Travel Association

l

	 PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry

l

	 Protein Food and Nutrition Development 	 	
	 Association of India

l

	 Ranjangaon Industries Association

l

	 Retailers Association of India

l

	 Seafood Exporters Association of India

l

Solvent Extractors Association of India

l	

Soyabean Processors Association of India

l	

199

Sustainable
Livelihoods

200

Independent
Assurance Statement

201

Sustainable
Livelihoods

202

Independent
Assurance Statement

203

Sustainable
Livelihoods

204

Independent
Assurance Statement

205

Figures in this section are as on June 2015.

