Corporate Sustainability Report

2014-15

CONTENTS
About the Report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 04
CEO’s Message. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 05
Organizational Profile. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 08
Stakeholder Engagement and Materiality Definition. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Our Sustainability Strategy and Corporate Governance . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Our Marketplace. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Our Workforce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
Our Community . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Our Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
GRI Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
External Assurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Contact. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92

3

Report Application Level
2015

*Please see GRI Application Level Service organizational mark on page 73

About The Report
TCS publishes Sustainability Reports annually, the last
report being for Financial Year 2013-14.This is TCS' Ninth
Sustainability Report, for Financial Year 2014-15 (April to
March). It has been prepared in conformance with the
G3.1 Sustainability Reporting Guidelines published by the
Global Reporting Initiative (GRI). The report addresses the
key sustainability topics gleaned through interactions with
the different stakeholder groups, based on the core
principles of materiality and stakeholder inclusiveness.
These topics cover the full range of material economic,
social and environmental impacts of the organization.
The report boundaries and exclusions are provided below:
Data measurement techniques and the bases of
calculations and estimates are furnished in the relevant
areas of the report. The Company does not believe there is
any substantial divergence from the GRI Indicator Protocols.

4

There have been no significant changes from the last
reporting period in the scope, boundary, or measurement
methods applied in the report. There has been no
restatement of information provided in earlier reports.
The data is sourced from Ultimatix, the Company's core
enterprise platform which runs all internal processes in HR,
Finance and Project Management and is also the portal for
employees to provide their opinions and feedback. All the
data is audited by relevant third party auditors as part of
ISO and financial audits.
This report has been externally assured by KPMG. The scope
and basis of the assurance are described in the assurance
letter issued by KPMG. No other relationship exists between
TCS and KPMG.

Data

Basis

Exclusions

Financial

TCS' Consolidated, Global Operations

None

Human Resources

TCS Ltd.'s global operations, including wholly
owned subsidiaries

Subsidiaries not wholly owned by
TCS (accounting for 3.6% of
consolidated headcount).

Environmental

Delivery centers in India and UK, Hungary,
Singapore, China, Philippines, Brazil, Chile,
Uruguay and Mexico.

Remaining delivery centers outside India
(accounting for approx. 4% of headcount)

CEO's Message
Dear Stakeholders,
I am glad to connect with you around this time each year
on the occasion of the publication of TCS Corporate
Sustainability Report. This is our 9th edition of the Report
since 2007.
I am pleased to reaffirm our support to the Ten Principles of
the United Nations Global Compact in the areas of Human
Rights, Labour, Environment and Anti-Corruption.
FY 2014-15 has been another year of industry leading
growth rates and deepening our footprint in key markets.
Our revenues grew 15.7 % to $ 15.5 billion on a year-onyear basis and our net profits grew 12.8% to $ 3.54¹billion
while sustaining our operating and net margins.
We intensified our focus on key markets like Japan – crafted
a new joint venture with Mitsubishi Corp to strengthen our
presence and create a platform for growth. We started a
new talent paradigm in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia by
creating the first all women center in BPS and IT.
I am proud that as an organization we sustain and improve
the quality of experience of our 1500+ customers – Over
96% of our customers appreciate the responsiveness and
accessibility of our project teams; 98% consider TCS as a
partner of choice and are willing to endorse our
capabilities; and 94% feel that it is easy to collaborate and
do business with us.
As an organization, we continue to build our people
strength through diversity in multiple dimensions. While
our total employee base reached 319,656 this year, making
us the third largest employer in the global IT services
industry, we were also delighted to celebrate the landmark
of employing 105,481 women – a rare feat in the corporate
world also in the context of TCS being host to 122
nationalities across our global footprint of 232 locations.
While we focus on business, TCS continues to promote
health and wellness of our employees through the Fit4Life
program. Sponsorship of marathons like the TCS New York
City Marathon has created a unique opportunity to engage
with the communities in health and wellness. With our
Purpose4Life program, TCSers volunteered over 200,000
hours globally to make an impact in the communities in
education, health, and environment.
These are exciting times when India has taken the lead in
mandating corporate spend on social causes. FY 2015
represents the first year for reporting on CSR under the
new regime of the Companies Act 2013. TCS has a CSR
Committee of the Board and has published a global CSR
Policy. We have also established a CSR Foundation to
undertake large scale projects. This is in addition to the
existing volunteering and projects which utilize core
competency to support social causes.
TCS was among the first corporates to identify with the
Prime Minister's Swachh Bharat Abhiyan (Clean India

Initiative) and has
pledged `100 Crores
to build dedicated
sanitation facilities for
girl students in
government schools.
Our CSR flagship, the
Adult Literacy
programme, reached
over 2 lakh
beneficiaries with ~
30,000 jail inmates
becoming literate.
STEM education has become a focal point for our
community efforts in the USA, Canada, UK and Australia.
Since its inception in in 2009, goIT has impacted 8,800+
students across 11 cities. In UK the IT Futures programme
has facilitated learning for students in 160 schools. TCS is
also proud to be a founding donor of the Queen Elizabeth
Prize for Engineering.
Safety and well-being of our employees is of prime
importance. Our drive on road safety, ergonomics, fire
safety, general office and personal safety is strengthened
with a behavioral safety approach. We have deepened our
engagement with employees on safety and convert them
to being safety responsive. We have completed a year since
the launch of Safety First initiative on May 2, 2014 in which
we had chosen to focus on Accidents, Crime, Health and
Self Harm. We are constantly working to make TCS a 'Zero
Incidents' organization - both internally and externally.
The endeavour to pursue our Environmental Sustainability
Roadmap continues with the same zeal and commitment.
We are on-track against our targets for sustainable growth.
Carbon footprint and energy management are among the
areas of strong focus. We continue to work towards the
target of specific carbon footprint reduction in order to
decouple business growth from the carbon and energy
footprint. Green buildings, green IT, operational energy
efficiency and renewable energy are the pillars for
achieving this target.
Looking forward, we have a unique opportunity to grow
and lead our industry to greater heights with a strong focus
on our customers, a culture of innovation and
collaboration, provide a platform for our employees to
realise their potential and make a strong impact on society.
We continue to invest in new technology and building
people capabilities. We remain a performance driven
organization that believes in excellence and rigor in
everything we do.
Regards,
N. Chandrasekaran
CEO & MD, TCS

1] Excluding impact of $423 Mn paid as Special One-time Bonus to employees
5

Organizational Profile

Organizational Prof ile
Tata Consultancy Services Limited (TCS) is an IT services, business solutions and outsourcing organization that delivers real
results to global businesses, with a high level of certainty. TCS offers a consulting-led, complete and integrated portfolio of IT and
IT-enabled services delivered through its unique Global Network Delivery Model (GNDM™), recognized as an industry benchmark
of excellence in distributed software development.
Founded in 1968 as part of the Tata group, TCS is headquartered in Mumbai, India and is a public limited company², listed on the
National Stock Exchange (NSE) and Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) in India. In FY 2015, TCS reported consolidated revenues of
USD 15.45 billion.

Mission and Values
TCS has built a global reputation for its ability to help customers achieve their business objectives – by providing innovative,
best-in-class consulting, IT and IT-enabled solutions and services. TCS' core set of values underpin all activities in the
Company and these include leadership with trust, integrity, excellence, respect for the individual and learning/sharing.

Business Overview
TCS is an Information Technology (IT) services, consulting and business solutions company that delivers measurable
results to global enterprises. The Company's full services portfolio consists of Application Development and Maintenance,
Business Intelligence, Enterprise Solutions, Assurance Services, Engineering and Industrial Services, IT Infrastructure
Services, Business Process Outsourcing, Consulting and Asset leveraged solutions. In addition, the Company has launched
several new service offerings around Mobility, Social computing, Big Data and the Cloud.
The Company has built strong domain capabilities in a range of industry verticals, positioning itself as a strategic partner
capable of reliably delivering innovative technology-led solutions to business problems. Key industry verticals serviced by
the Company are: Banking, Financial Services and Insurance (BFSI), Retail and Consumer Packaged Goods, Telecom, Media
and Entertainment, Hi-Tech, Manufacturing, Life Sciences and Healthcare (LSHC), Energy, Resources and Utilities (ERU),
and Travel, Transportation and Hospitality (TTH).

2.7%

4.6%

3.5%
4.1%

BFSI

5.8%

Retail & Distribution
40.7%

Manufacturing
Telecom

6.4%

Life Sciences & Healthcare
Hi Tech
8.8%

Energy & Utility
Travel & Hospitality
Media & Entertainment
9.8%

Others
13.6%

Figure 1: Revenue break-up by industry vertical

2] Please refer to our FY2015 Annual Report for details of the shareholding pattern (Page 108), changes in the capital structure during FY2015 (Page 144) and the complete list
of Subsidiaries (Pages 216-218). Our Annual Report can be accessed from our website. The URL is:
http://www.tcs.com/investors/Documents/Annual%20Reports/TCS_Annual_Report_2014-2015.pdf

8

Global Footprint
The Company has also been steadily expanding its geographic footprint. In addition to the traditional markets for its services –
namely, North America, United Kingdom and Continental Europe, the Company has been expanding its presence in emerging
markets like Asia-Pacific, India, Latin America and Middle East & Africa.
As of March 31, 2015, TCS had 232 offices across 46 countries. The break-up of offices by geography is as below:

29 14 25 31 24
USA and
Canada

UK and
Ireland

8 Countries
Latin
America

13
Countries
Europe

9 100
8 Countries
Middle East
and Africa

12 Countries
Asia
Pacific

India

In addition, TCS' Global Delivery Network Model (GNDM™) consists of a network of 151 delivery supporting
centers located in 30 countries See Figure 2) that uniquely positions us to deliver the Company's world class
services seamlessly to any location in the world.

UK 4

Europe 6

N. America 10

India 111

MEA 3
Latin America

APAC 8

9

Figure 2: TCS' Global Network Delivery footprint
The revenue breakup by geography is provided in  Figure 3.

6.4%

2.1 2.0%
%

9.3%

North America
UK
Continental Europe
51.9%

11.6%

Asia Paciﬁc
India
Latin America
MEA

16.7%

Figure  3: Revenue Breakup by Geography

9

Net Sales

$15.45Bn

Operating
Margin

Net
Income#

26.9%

$3.5 Bn

TCS
by numbers
Number of
nationalities
in the
workforce

122
Clients
contributing
more than
$100 Mn/year

29
Reduction in
per capita
carbon footprint
(Scope 1 + Scope 2) **

39%

% of women
in the
workforce

33%
Number of
shareholders

616,828
Reduction in
per capita
business air travel
emissions**

55%

Total Assets

$11.97Bn

$1,087Mn

(on March 31, 2015)

(on March 31, 2015)

$79.59Bn

319,656

67,123

14.9%

Volunteering
eﬀort in CSR

Investment in
CSR initiatives*

2,21,000
Reduction in
per capita
fresh water
consumption**

13%

$10.66Bn

Number of
Employees

Attrition in
IT Services*

(person hours)*

Retained
earnings

Market
Capitalization

New hires
in FY 2015

*Excl subsidiaries
** Reduction given is over baseline year 2007-08 Coverage as per Annexure A
# Excluding impact of $ 423 Mn paid as Special One-time Bonus to employees

10

Taxes#

` 253.55
crores
Reduction in
per capita
paper
consumption**

78%

Clients
contributing
more than
$1 Mn/year

791
Reduction in
per capita
electricity
consumed**

42%

Awards
Key awards and accolades received by TCS in FY 2015 are listed below.

Corporate

n

Brand Finance: Fastest growing IT industry brand over the last five years

n

Achieves Superbrands status in the UK

n

The Economic Times: Company of the Year

n

Business Standard: Best Company of 40 years

n

NASSCOM 2014 Awards: Excellence in Gender Inclusivity & Best IT Services
and Product Company
NASSCOM Silver Jubilee Awards: Leading IT Company for 25 years

n

Investors
n

TCS wins the Best CEO and Best Investor Relations titles in FinanceAsia's 15th
Annual Best Companies Poll

n

TCS amongst the Most Honored Companies in Institutional Investor's 2014
Annual All-Asia Executive Team Rankings

Leadership
N Chandrasekaran

n

CNN-IBN: Indian of the Year (Business)

n

Finance Asia's Best Companies Poll: India's Best CEO

n

Institutional Investor's 2014 All-Asia Executive Team Rankings: Best CEO

n

Business Today: Best CEO

n

CNBC TV 18: Voted one of India's Top 15 business icons

n

Informatica: Innovation Award for Test Data Management

n

SAP: Run SAP Partner of the Year & Customers' Choice Award (SAP Pinnacle)

n

Renault-Nissan: Best Service Support 2014 Award

n

NXP Semiconductors: Best Supplier for Indirect Services

n

JD Edwards: Partner Excellence award

n

TESTA 2014: Leading Vendor Award for Quality Assurance(QA) and Testing services

n

CA Technologies:

n

l

Country Partner of the Year

l

Partner of the Year - Security solutions

l

Public Sector Partner of the Year

Partners

Oracle Excellence Awards
l

Global System Integrator Customer Experience (CX) Applications

l

Specialised Partner of the Year

11

Talent
Management

n

Gold Stevie: Best Human Resources Department 2014

n

Top Employers Institute: Certified as Top Employer North America 2015

n

Top Employers Institute: Ranked # 1 Employer in Europe

n

Top Employers Institute: Ranked # 1 Employer in UK

n

Golden Peacock National Training Award 2014

n

Six awards at Asia's Best Employer Brand Awards 2014, Singapore

n

Diversity and Inclusion (DANDI) awards: Top Workforce honour

n

World HRD Congress RASBIC awards: Best Overall Recruiting & Staffing
Organization & Best Use of Technology for Recruiting

n

TCS wins the Best CEO and Best Investor Relations titles in FinanceAsia's 15th

Capability
and Innovation

Annual Best Companies Poll
n

TCS amongst the Most Honored Companies in Institutional Investor's 2014
Annual All-Asia Executive Team Rankings

Community &
Environment

n

Dow Jones Sustainability World Index: Ranked Global Leader

n

Asian Sustainability Ranking: Ranked #1 of Top 100 Companies

n

The CDP Climate Performance Leadership Index: A-List world leader in
corporate action on climate change

n

Carbon Disclosure Leadership Index, 2014

n

Gold Stevie: Corporate Social Responsibility Program

n

JSW-Times of India: Earth Care Award

n

Lumity Community Corps Corporate Champion: Enhancing quality of STEM Education

n

Supply Chain Carbon Performance Leadership Index (SCCPLI), 2014

n

Bombay Chamber's Civic Awards 2013- 14 for Sustainable Environmental Initiatives for TCS Sahyadri Park,
Pune

n

HYSEA CSR Award 2015 under category Community Development & Environment Protection by
Hyderabad Software Enterprises Association, Andhra Pradesh

n

12

CII Energy Efficient Unit Award 2014 for TCS Deccan Park, Hyderabad

Stakeholder Engagement & Materiality Def inition
Our Stakeholders
TCS engages with a broad spectrum of stakeholders, internal and external to understand their concerns and priorities and use
those inputs to guide policy formulation and decision-making. Business (or, in some cases, policy) considerations largely govern
the decision on which stakeholders to engage with and in what manner
and periodicity.
A stakeholder prioritization exercise was undertaken and in consultation with the Company's management, the key stakeholders
were identified. While Customers, Employees, Customers and Shareholders Investors continue to be are obvious stakeholders, the
supply-chain of the Company's people-centric business consists of various academic institutions, engineering colleges, staffing
agencies and other vendors. Staying at the cutting edge of technological developments requires us to partner with leading
technology firms to develop and market industry-specific solutions.
TCS is a member of a number of industry bodies like NASSCOM and CII and works closely with these bodies in shaping policy.
TCS interacts with governments in the course of regulatory compliance and also in implementing e-governance initiatives or as
part of government-facilitated community betterment initiatives. Lastly, TCS works with local communities directly or through
various NGOs as part of CSR initiatives in different parts of the world, and with the larger society.
Described below is TCS' stakeholder interaction framework. Some other stakeholders that the Company closely engages with,
such as Industry Analysts, Equity Analysts and the media have not been mentioned here because they are proxies for other
named stakeholders – customers, shareholders and the larger society respectively.
Stakeholder

Interfacing Group

Engagement Types by Frequency

Customers
As needed:

Project-related Calls and meetings, PMRs,
Relationship Meetings, Visits, Responses
to RFI/RFPs, Sponsored Events, Mailers,
Newsletters, Brochures

Employees
As needed:

Monthly:

Town Halls, Roadshows, Project /
Operations Reviews, Videoconferences,
Audio conference calls, PEEP, PROPEL
(associate forum), One-on-one
counseling

Continuous: TCS website, Customer portal
Half-yearly: Customer Satisfaction Surveys3
Annual:
Customer Summit, Innovation Day

HR | Senior Mgmt
Continuous: TCS website, Ultimatix Notice Board, CEO
Connect, CTO Blog, Corporate Corner,
JustAsk, IdeaMAX, Dipstick surveys,
mPower (quick grievance redressal)
Annual:
PULSE (employee feedback survey), Hats
Off (Long Service Awards), Velocity (Sales
meet), Blitz (Business Planning meet)

@TCS (Inhouse magazine)

Shareholders
As needed:

Sales / Pre-Sales | Marketing | Delivery Teams | Senior Mgmt

Press Releases and Press Conferences,
Email advisories, Facility Visits, In-person
meetings, Investor Conferences, NonDeal Roadshows, Conference Calls
Quarterly: Financial Statements in Indian GAAP and

Investor Relations | Company Secy | Senior Mgmt
IFRS, Earnings Call, Exchange Notifications,
Press Conference
Continuous: Investors Page on TCS website
Annual:
Annual General Meeting, Annual Report

3] The Survey is done at an account-level and measures TCS' performance on various parameters across multiple dimensions.

13

Stakeholder

Interfacing Group

Engagement Types by Frequency
HR | Senior Mgmt | CTO

Academic Institutions
As needed:

Academic Interface Program,
Co-Innovation Network meetings

Continuous: TCS website, Academic portal
Annual:
Sangam (High-level academic
conference), Campus recruitment

Head Hunters | Staffing Firms | Other Suppliers
One time:

RFI/RFPs, Empanelment process

HR | ISUs⁴ | Procurement
As needed:

Alliance | Mgmt | CTO

Partners and Collaborators
As needed:

Meetings / Calls, COIN meetings, Visits,
Partner Events

Monthly:
Quarterly:
Annual:

Corporate Affairs | Finance | Senior Mgmt
As needed:

Conferences and seminars,
Working Committee Meetings, Surveys,
Meetings

Governments
As needed:

Governance RFIs / RFPs,
Presentations, Project Meetings, Reviews,
Calls and Meetings, Surveys, Consultative
sessions

NGOs / Local Communities | Society at large
·As needed:

Field visits, Due Diligence, Calls and
Meetings, Conferences and seminars,
Surveys, Press Releases, Press
conferences, Media interviews and
quotes, Sponsored events

Transactional meetings, Periodic Reviews,
Surveys

Conference Calls
Business Reviews
Partner Events

Alliance | Mgmt | CTO
Annual:

Conferences, Summits

Government ISU | Corporate Affairs | HSE / Finance
CSR Team | Senior Mgmt
Continuous: TCS Website

CSR Team | Volunteers | Corp Comm | Senior Mgmt
Continuous: TCS Website

Apolitical Stance
While TCS works closely with consultative bodies of various industry associations in advising governments on policy
formulation or advocating changes to policy, the Company does not spend on lobbying and maintains an entirely apolitical
stance in line with the Tata Code of Conduct. The Company does not support any specific political party or candidate for political
office. Nor does it offer or give any company funds or property as donations to any political party, candidate or campaign.

4] Industry Service Units

14

Definition of Content
The content for this report is arrived at by applying a materiality filter on the various topics that come up in the course of
stakeholder interactions described in the earlier section. A team of senior managers evaluated sustainability issues providing
a rating for each. A final evaluation of the scorecards indicated the key issues for the Company. This report shall focus on the
issues thus identified:
Stakeholders

Material Topics

Customers

Business knowledge, Delivery capability, Quality, Data privacy and security, Ethical
behavior, Fair business practices

Employees

Safe and comfortable workplace, Engaging assignments, Learning opportunities,
Career development, Compensation structure

Shareholders

Continued revenue growth, Proﬁtability, Cashﬂows, Corporate Governance,
Transparency and Disclosure, Dividend payouts

Academic Institutions

Job creation, Curriculum enhancement, Internship opportunities, Faculty development

Vendors, Partners and
Collaborators

Ethical behavior, Fair business practices, Governance, Sustainability of Demand,
Credit-worthiness

Governments / NGOs /
Local Communities

Good governance, Ethics and Compliance, Support for developmental programs, Job
opportunities, Responsible Citizenry

Society at large

Environmental impact

15

Corporate Governance

Our Sustainability Strategy and Corporate Governance
TCS embodies the Tata group's philosophy of building sustainable businesses that are ﬁrmly rooted in the community and
demonstrate care for the environment. Towards this, TCS has adopted the 'triple bottom-line' approach and recognizes that
People, Planet and Proﬁt as the central pillars of corporate sustainability.

Profits

Sustainable
Marketplace

Business
Focus

Governance

Environment
Sustainability
Internal & External

Planet

Environment
Focus

Internal stakeholders
of sustainability
Key elements of sustainability

People
Focus

Sustainable
Communities
Internal & External

People
Triple Bottom Line

People: Sustainable Internal and External Communities – Internally, 319,656 employees are the backbone of TCS, who are
actively engaged with in order to drive sustainability initiatives. Externally, TCS conducts a diverse range of CSR initiatives in the
areas of education & skill building, health environment and affirmative action using volunteering, sponsorships and pro bono
leveraging of the Company's IT capabilities as the modes of engagement. In addition initiatives focused at promoting supply
chain and procurement sustainability ensure the alignment of that vendors and suppliers to the sustainability objectives.
Planet: Environmental Sustainability – From designing sustainable infrastructure, running efficient operations, to engaging with
supply chain partners in green procurement and disposal activities; TCS takes a holistic approach towards reducing its energy,
water, material, waste and carbon footprint. TCS offices as well as IT infrastructure are sustainably designed and built for
maximum resource efficiency.
Profit: Sustainable Marketplace – In addition to ensuring sustainability of TCS' business performance, the Company's
sustainability specialists work across industry verticals with an aim to provide next-generation sustainability services to
customers. Integrating sustainability into business strategies and unlocking environmental efficiencies in the entire value chain is
a significant value add.
Corporate Governance
Strong corporate governance that oversees business strategies and ensures fiscal accountability, ethical corporate behavior and
fairness to all stakeholders, creates all the conditions necessary to foster sustainability. Being part of the 147-year old Tata group
which epitomizes sustainability, TCS has inherited a strong legacy of fair, transparent and ethical governance, as embodied in the
Tata Code of Conduct⁵ (TCoC).

5] The full text of the Tata Code of Conduct is available on our website. (URL: http://www.tcs.com/SiteCollectionDocuments/About%20TCS/Tata-Code-Conduct-2013.pdf)

18

This is aligned with the ten principles articulated in the UN Global Compact to which TCS is a signatory.
At the top of the governance structure is the Board of Directors representing the shareholders, and various Committees on the
Board, overseeing the Executive Management. TCS has a unitary board structure consisting of 11 members of whom 9 are NonExecutive Directors⁶ (including the Chairman) and 6 are Independent Directors.⁷ Ms. Aarthi Subramanian was appointed as an
Executive Director for a period of three years with effect from March 12, 2015. The composition of the Company's Board and
detailed profiles of Board Members are available on the website.⁸
The supervisory capability of the current Board has been significantly boosted by the inclusion of highly capable individuals with
diverse global management perspectives, broad corporate experience and specific expertise in corporate governance and
compliance as independent, non-executive directors.
Different aspects of TCS' Corporate Governance are addressed below:
Aspect
Avoidance of Conflict
of Interest

How
Conflict of interest between the Board's executive function and the supervisory function is
minimized by making the Chairmanship of the Board a non-executive role, and keeping it
separate from that of the Chief Executive Officer and Managing Director.
TCS has a Code of Conduct for Non-Executive Directors,
(http://www.tcs.com/investors/corp_governance/Documents/TCS_Directors_Policy.pdf ),
requiring them to always act in the interest of the Company and ensure that any other business
or personal association, which they may have, does not involve any conflict of interest with the
operations of the Company and their role therein.

Similarly, all employees including the Managing Director and Executive Directors are prohibited
from freelancing or accepting any position of responsibility with or without remuneration with
Different aspects of TCS’ Corporate
Governance
arewithout
addressed
any other
company
TCS'below:
written approval. For Executive Directors and the Managing
Director, such approval must be obtained from the Board.

Intra-group
Transactions

TCS does not derive any material revenues (~0.003% of revenues in FY 2015) from other Tata
group companies. There is no intermingling of employees and resources including cash amongst
the Group companies.
Independent Directors make up half the Board. Any dealing with Tata Sons or with a group
company is done on an arms-length basis and has to be approved by the Board. Such
transactions are reviewed closely by the Board to ensure that all shareholders' interests are
protected before they are approved. All transactions with Tata group companies are disclosed in
TCS' Annual Report (Page 165-168).interests are protected before they are approved. All
transactions with Tata group companies are disclosed in our Annual Report (Page 134-136).

6]
7]

8]

A Non-Executive Director is defined as a Director who is not involved in the day-to-day operations of the Company and is not a full-time employee of the Company.
An Independent Director is a Non-Executive Director, who (a) does not have any material relationship/ transaction with the Company, its Directors, Promoters, senior
management, holding company and its subsidiaries, (b) Is not related to Promoters/Board/Senior Management, (c) Has not been an executive of the Company in the
past 3 years, (d) Has not been a partner/executive of the Company's statutory audit/ internal audit firm, legal/consulting firm in the past 3 years, (e) Has not been a
material supplier, service-provider or customer or a lessor or lessee of the company, (f) Is not a substantial shareholder i.e. owning 2% or more and (g) Is not less than 21
years of age.
http://www.tcs.com/about/corp_facts/board_directors/Pages/default.aspx

19

Aspect
Board Oversight of
the Sustainability
Agenda

How
To ensure that business sustainability gets adequate governance focus, TCS' Board of Directors
meets 7 to 8 times a year instead of the statutory 4 times. While four of these meetings are for
review and approval of financial results, the remainder is for more detailed oversight of
business, strategy and sustainability matters.
This ensures that the Board's focus goes beyond financial performance and covers various
operational and strategic issues including sustainability aspects, budgets, industry
performance, peer review and competition analysis, overall risk assessment, performance of
subsidiaries, opportunities for organic and inorganic growth etc.
The CEO is the Director responsible for Sustainability. Oversight of the Company's sustainability
strategy is the responsibility of the Sustainability Head, EVP & Global Head HR. He is supported
by the Sustainability Council and dedicated teams for Corporate Social Responsibility and
Environment, each headed by highly-qualified specialists in their respective domains. Their
goals are determined by Senior Management in line with the Company's overall sustainability
objectives, and performance on these two specific aspects of TCS' sustainability agenda is
reviewed by the Board on an annual basis. A framework to enable the Board's self-evaluation is
currently under review.
The Sustainability Council
In order to drive the Company's sustainability initiatives effectively, a sustainability council with
representation from key departments within TCS has been convened. Processes for quarterly
review on performance against targets for each stakeholder have also been implemented.
The Executive Vice President and Global Head of HR presides over all matters related to
Sustainability within the organization and the overall Corporate Sustainability of the
organization falls within the purview of the CEO & MD.

Board Level Committee
(including CEO & MD - Director Responsible for
Corporate Sustainability)

Executive Vice-President & Global Head-HR
Head - Corporate Sustainability

Sustainability Council
Representatives from...
Internal
IT

Infrastructure,
Planning &
Development
Human
Resources

Corporate Social
Responsibility

Corporate
Communications

20

Administration

Health, Safety &
Environment

TCS Maitree

Investor
Relations

Aspect
Fiscal Oversight

How
An Audit Committee, consisting entirely of independent, non-executive Directors, oversees TCS'
disclosure process to ensure that sufficient and credible information is disclosed, and that the
published financial statements reflect a true and fair position of the company's finances.
The committee meets four times a year to approve the quarterly accounts and another three to
four times for an in-depth consideration of internal audit reports. The Audit Committee also
actively ensures that the internal audit processes provide adequate support in improving the
Company's business processes, i.e., making the Company more efficient and cost-effective.
As an additional governance control on access to the Company's cash, TCS has a Bank Account
Committee of Directors which approves the opening and closing of bank accounts of the
Company and to authorize persons to operate the bank accounts of the Company.

Independent and
Effective
Validation

TCS has an independent third party, M/s Ernst and Young, to oversee and carry out internal
audits of the Company's operations as per an internal audit plan which is reviewed annually by
the Audit Committee in consultation with the Statutory Auditors. In line with international
practice, the planning and conduct of internal audit is oriented towards the review of controls in
the management of risks and opportunities in the Company's activities. The external auditors of
the Company are Deloitte Haskins and Sells, who do not have any undue dependence on TCS.

Disclosure and
Transparency

Benchmarked against global peers, TCS discloses significant - operational and financial metrics
on a quarterly basis. The quarterly, half-yearly and annual results are published in leading Indian
newspapers, emailed out to analysts and investors who subscribe to that service and posted on
the website http://www.tcs.com/investors/Pages/default.aspx. Half-yearly results are sent to
shareholders along with a message from the Managing Director on the Company's
performance.
The Earnings Release every quarter is accompanied by a press-conference which is video
webcast live through the website. There is also a conference call where Management briefs
investors and analysts on the quarter gone by, and takes questions.
In addition, there is a robust investor outreach program as part of which the TCS Management
meets investors at the Company's premises or at investor conferences and addresses their
queries and concerns.

Ethics and
Compliance9

The Tata Code of Conduct, which every employee signs at the time of joining the Company,
contains 25 clauses that make up a governing framework for responsible corporate citizenship
and ethical behaviour. TCS has established procedures to deploy the TCoC and to enable
employees, customers, suppliers and partners to understand the code and follow it in letter and
spirit.
The leadership team personally conveys TCS' values and the importance of the TCoC at
employee events. There are Local Ethics Counsellors at every Company location to advise and
guide employees on ethical matters.
Customers and suppliers are made aware of the TCoC through specific clauses in proposals,
contracts, contract discussions, and through the TCS website.
In addition, senior managers with access to privileged information, have to comply with an
additional code for the Prevention of Insider Trading. TCS also has a global policy to address
Sexual Harassment at the work place. This policy was updated in February 2014 to align with
current legal mandates, in particular the “Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013” enacted in India where TCS has the majority of
its workforce.
At the Board level, the Ethics and Compliance Committee oversees TCS' compliance to the
Codes of Conduct to be followed by the Directors, Officers and other employees. Monthly
Reports are sent to the Committee on matters relating to the Insider Trading Code and the TCoC.
One meeting of the Ethics and Compliance Committee was held during the year.

9] No significant legal or regulatory non-compliance in general or specifically in relation to the Company’s products and services was brought to the Company’s attention
in Fy2015.

21

Aspect
Board Composition
and Selection of
Board Members

How
The Nominations Committee, consisting of two independent Directors and the Chairman,
makes recommendations regarding the composition of the Board, identifies suitable
individuals who can be inducted as Independent Directors and takes steps to refresh the
composition of the Board from time to time.
The supervisory capability of the current Board has been significantly boosted by the inclusion
of highly capable individuals with global management perspectives, broad corporate
experience and specific expertise in corporate governance and compliance as independent,
non-executive directors.

Protecting Minority
shareholders'
interests

The Corporate Governance philosophy at TCS, based on the Tata Code of Conduct, emphasizes
fairness and transparency to all stakeholders. The Company also has a variety of channels
through which minority shareholders can interact with the Management / Board to express
their concerns.
There is a year-round, global investor outreach program where investors can interact with
Management. Minority shareholders can move their private resolutions for discussion by the
Board of Directors, or even requisition a General Body Meeting.
Small shareholders can interact with the Board of Directors in person at the Annual General
Meeting and have their queries/grievances resolved. They can also communicate any
grievance to the Company Secretary's office where complaints are tracked to closure. At the
Board level, a Shareholders/Investors Grievance Committee of Directors consisting of two
Independent Directors and one Non-independent Director oversees the redressal of these
complaints.

Employee access to
the Board

Employees at TCS are highly empowered and the Company's culture encourages open
communications and offers various channels for communicating concerns and grievances.
Larger concerns are represented to the Board by the Executive Directors. In addition, individual
senior-level employees are also invited to present to the Board on specific topics under
discussion, from time to time.
Lastly, the Company has a Whistle Blower Policy, with the necessary mechanism for employees
to directly report concerns about unethical behavior to the Chairperson of the Audit
Committee, without fear of reprisal or victimization.

Sustainability and
risk management

TCS has an Enterprise-wide Risk Management (ERM) process administered by a Risk Office that
continually identifies the various risks threatening the Company's continued sustainability, as
grouped under:
(1) Strategic
(2) Operational
(3) Financial and
(4) Compliance related risks
The Risk Office maintains a Risk Register and draws up suitable risk mitigation plans for each of
the risks identified therein. These risks are reviewed by the Board periodically.

Succession
planning

Business sustainability requires consistency in management vision and minimization of impact
when there is a leadership change. Therefore, succession planning is an important element in
ensuring smooth transitions. At TCS, succession planning occurs at every level – at the
corporate level, at the business unit level, at the account level and even at the project level.
At the highest level, succession planning of senior management is directly reviewed by the
Executive Committee of the Board. Business/Unit Heads are invited to Board Meetings from
time to time to give presentations to the Board to update them. This provides an opportunity
for the Board to interact with Senior Executives periodically and assess values, competencies
and capabilities to help them identify suitable internal successors and provide feedback.
In these last four decades, TCS has gone through two CEO-level transitions, the last one in
October 2009. The seamless manner in which that transition took place is evidence that the
Company's succession planning is working well.

22

Aspect
Remuneration
Policy

How
The Company follows a compensation mix of fixed pay, benefits and Economic Value Added
Analysis based variable pay. Individual performance pay is determined by business performance
and the performance of the individuals measured through the annual appraisal process.
Compensation for Non-Executive Directors on the Board consists of:
n

n

n

Sitting Fees for attending Board meetings and meetings of Committees of the Board, to the
tune of INR 10,000 per meeting.
Commission, as decided by the Board of Directors and approved by members at the Annual
General Meeting, within the ceiling of 1% of the net profits of the Company as computed
under the Companies Act, 1956. The commission is distributed amongst the Non-Executive
Directors based on their attendance and contribution at the Board and certain Committee
meetings, as well as the time spent on operational matters other than at meetings.
Reimbursement of any out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the Directors for attending
meetings.

Remuneration of the Managing Director and Executive Directors consists of a fixed component
(salary, benefits, perquisites and allowances) and a performance-liked variable component
(commission).
The Remuneration Committee decides the annual increments within the salary scale approved
by the Members, and the commission payable to the Managing Director and the Executive
Directors out of the profits for the financial year and within the ceilings prescribed under law.
The commission amount is based on the Company's performance as well as that of the
Managing Director and each Executive Director, measured along several sustainability-linked
criteria discussed in this report. Details of the compensation paid out to Members of the Board
in FY 2015 are disclosed on Page 99 of the Annual Report.

Serving as an Ethical Exemplar
TCS regards integrity as the first core value that underpins all business activities. The Company has earned its reputation of
trustworthiness through several decades of consistent, value-driven conduct.
TCS has adopted the Tata Code of Conduct (TCoC) which is signed by every employee on joining and which serves as a roadmap
on principled conduct. Training on TCoC is a mandatory part of the induction process for all associates. Awareness of TCoC and
adherence to it is promoted by several methods such as annual ethics awareness week featuring invited speeches, poster
sessions, contests, ethics themed video screenings. A Whistle blower Policy has also been incorporated through which instances
of misconduct can be reported directly to the Board without fear of reprisal.
TCS has been able to build a strong, highly successful, global business, and is able to sustain its leadership position by adhering
to the high standards of principled conduct. In all contracts with customers, suppliers, and partners, clauses on principled
conduct are explicitly included. TCS seeks to learn leading practices through active participation in international and Tata Group
forums on ethics, and adopt leading practices that aid in improving adherence to principled conduct.
The Company's policies and training modules have been periodically reviewed and revised to comply with the legislation with
respect to bribery, corruption and with improved norms on business ethics.
TCS enterprise risk management programme (ERM) involves risk identification, assessment and risk mitigation planning for
strategic, operational and compliance related risks across business units, functions and geographies.

23

Our Marketplace
Sustainability of Business Performance
Key stakeholder concerns regarding the sustainability of TCS' business performance are centered around
five major areas:
n

whether there is sufficient headroom for continued growth

n

whether the Company's size could impede agility

n

whether supplyside constraints could hamper growth or impact margins

n

whether macroeconomic uncertainties or new technologies might impair business

n

whether the Company is investing sufficiently in innovation

Some of these concerns are addressed in this section of the report.
Key strategic risks faced by TCS and the Company's approach to mitigating them are summarized on Page 62-63 of the FY 2015
Annual Report.
Strategy for long-term growth
TCS' revenue growth comes from following a multi-pronged strategy built around
(a) Expanding the Company's addressable market by geography, by industry and by service-line and
(b) Deepening the Company's relationships with existing clients.
Key elements of this strategy for sustainable, longer-term growth are summarized in Figure 4 and explained in greater detail on
Pages 58-59 of the FY15 Annual Report.

Customer
Centricity

Experience
Certainty

Full Services
Portfolio

Strategy for
Long-term
Sustainable
Growth

Non Linear
Business Models

GNDMTM

Figure 4: Five point strategy for long term growth

10] TCS' annual report is available online at: http://www.tcs.com/investors/Documents/Annual%20Reports/TCS_Annual_Report_2014-2015.pdf

24

Demand-side Sustainability
TCS has had a consistently stellar track-record of revenue growth. The Company's 10-year CAGR is 20.6% and closed FY 2015 with
revenue of USD 15.45 Bn (up 15% YoY).

78%

18000
16000
14000
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0

76%
74%
72%
70%
68%

Operating Costs as % of Rev

Revenue in USD Mn

Revenue and Cost Trend: FY 2005 - FY 2015

66%
FY05

FY06

FY07 FY08 FY09

Rev in USD Mn

FY10

FY11 FY12

FY13

FY14

Fy15

Operating Costs as % of Rev

Figure  5: Revenue Growth in USD (FY 2005-2015)
Other highlights of FY 2015:
n
n
n
n

Volume growth of 17% YoY
Gross Margin of 44.5%, EBIT margin of 26.9%
Gross headcount addition of 67,123
Net headcount addition of 19,192

TCS believes that the long term growth trajectory is sustainable because (a) the global market for IT services is growing, (b)
offshore outsourcing is today a mainstream strategic option, (b) TCS has the strong foundational elements needed to partake of
this growth and (c) TCS’ strategy for longer-term growth is delivering results.
Global market: Headroom for growth
According to NASSCOM’s Strategic Review, global spend on IT Services and BPM was estimated to be $834 Bn in 2014. This is a
highly fragmented market in which TCS’ market share is ~1.8%, suggesting significant headroom for growth.
Going forward, technology spending is expected to further increase as the technology intensity of businesses increases. The 6year CAGR for the period 2013-2019 is expected to be 3.1% according to Gartner. Historically, TCS’ growth is far higher than the
growth in global spend on IT services due to shifting customer preferences favoring greater offshore outsourcing.
Enablers for growth
The pre-requisites for sustaining growth are:
(a) maintaining the same high quality of service that customers have come to expect from the Company,
(b) continuing to invest in innovation so as to remain at the cutting edge of technological and
business evolution,
© ensuring that the Company remains agile despite the size and creating a strong brand that creates customer loyalty.
In the next few sub-sections, we explore these four foundational elements in further detail.

Best-in-class Quality
The TCS Quality Management System is a complete set of documents, tools, methods and practices built on and around the
business model, with a focus on service & solution delivery, customer management, security management and people processes.
The system is focused on ensuring that customers experience a level of certainty that no other organization can match.

25

Every project executed by TCS goes through a three-tier quality check to ensure that the customer receives a deliverable of the
highest quality:
Product
Quality

Product Quality
& Process
Compliance

Internal Quality Assurance

All work items, products or deliverables undergo peer review /
independent review / self review / code walkthrough.

External Quality Assurance

Competent associates external to the project verify each work
item or deliverable.

Final Inspection

An external reviewer does the final quality check to ensure
completeness and usability of the package before delivering
the final product to the client. In addition, the external
reviewer periodically verifies that the team is complying with
all quality process.
The Project Leader also does a final inspection
before delivery.

In addition, Project Management Reviews (PMR) are conducted every quarter by senior managers and project audits are
performed by to verify compliance with customer-specific processes and TCS iQMS.
Information Security and Data privacy
Information security and data privacy is critical to TCS' business. In pursuit of the Company's Security Vision, TCS has
implemented a comprehensive Information Security Management System (ISMS) framework based on the globally recognized
ISO 27001:2005 ISMS standard, covering network controls, network privacy, internet security, patch management system and
controls against malicious software. The Company's Information Security is managed by a team of security professionals having
industry-recognized credentials such as the CISA, CISM, CISSP, CEH, CBCP etc, and hailing from varied backgrounds and
experience, such as application development, Infrastructure services, Networking, Forensics, Legal and Compliance.
TCS considers all client information as confidential and have rigorous processes in place to protect the same. The Company's
security policy has been framed to comply with all international privacy laws and information security laws as applicable.
Collection, processing and dissemination of any personal data is done under highly controlled conditions.
Investing in Innovation
Constant innovation is important for business sustainability, ensuring as it does, the continued relevancy of the Company to its
customer's needs. Innovation is an important part of the organizational DNA of TCS and a key enabler of the 'Experience
Certainty' proposition. The Company has well defined processes and a framework to drive innovation across its diverse
businesses.
A collaborative network
of stakeholders

Identification and
delivery of
customer value

Co-Innovation
Network (COINTM)
Customer
Value
Proposition

Technology
Market Map

Categorization of
initiatives timelines and
nature of impact

Innovation
@ TCS
Foster and nurture
Innovative culture
- People Processes

Innovation
Culture

Innovation
Themes
Innovation
Life Cycle

Process for generation of ideas
and realization into business
Figure 6: Framework for driving innovation across TCS

26

Direction and purpose of
innovation programs

TCS has established a strong organizational focus for innovation - the Corporate Technology Organization (CTO) – which governs
innovation processes, sets benchmarks, guides creation of Intellectual Property and facilitates Innovation diffusion. Innovation is
delivered through:
n

Structured Innovation Engine: TCS Innovation Labs

n

Innovation Ecosystem: Co-Innovation Network, (COIN)™

n

Culture of Innovation: Knowledge Portals, Awards and People Practices

Apart from bringing big benefits to customers, TCS has, in the last couple of years, created over a hundred product patents and
its innovative products have won several awards from industry.

How

Disruptions
(Disruptive Innovation Radical)

Standard Methodologies
Six Sigma
Metrics and KPIs

Investments by TCS

TCS and Client joint
Innovation Lab TCS
Ecosystem

What

Transformations
(Sustaining Innovation Platform)

Productivity improvement
Product standardization
Centres of Excellence
D-7 Digital Dashboard

Technology Consumption
Management
IS Optimization of
applications
Advanced modelling and
simulation

Leverage Innovation
Ecosystem
Enterprise Architecture
Domain & Technology
Next Generation Development
Utility Computing, ‘IT Plan’
Management

Who

Continuous Improvement
(Sustaining Innovation Derivative)

Engagement Team with
Support from Practices
and CoEs

Engagement Team with +
CTO Organization
(Practices and R & D)

TCS CTO Organization,
TCS Innovation Network

Figure  7: An Overview of TCS' innovation effort

TCS R&D continues to attract top research talent from India and across the world. The Company continues to support sabbaticals,
internships and PhD sponsorships in research areas relevant to the Company, in premier academic institutions. Research based
competencies have been introduced in the Company's learning portal.
Details of the Company's R&D focus areas and innovations are provided on Pages 37-38 and 59 of the Annual Report. As of March
31, 2015, the company has applied for 2,277 patents of which 206 have been granted. TCS' R&D expenses increased in FY 2015, in
absolute terms as well as a percentage of revenue. The R&D centers at Pune, Chennai, Bengaluru, Delhi- NCR, Hyderabad, Kolkata
and Mumbai have been recognized by the GoI's Department of Scientific & Industrial Research (DSIR). The Company has also set
up innovation labs, product engineering groups and groups engaged in path-breaking technologies at multiple locations all over
the world.
Expenditure incurred in the Company's R&D centers during FY 2015, excluding expenses incurred by Innovation Centers and by
individual business units investing in building frameworks, products, platforms and other intellectual property, went up 11.6%
YoY as can be seen below:
FY 2014-15 ($ Mn)
R&D Expenses

36.5

FY 2013-14 ($ Mn)
32.7

% Increase
11.6%

Structured for Agility
A key concern that sustained growth engenders is the potential loss of agility in an organization that has outgrown its structure.
Another concern is around whether and how the organization will be able to focus on the right sectors for future growth.
Both these concerns are addressed by TCS' organization structure which is designed to enhance customer focus, accountability
and agility. TCS is organized into many small operational units, each with 4,000-15,000 employees, aligned to the different
industry verticals. Each market-facing Business Unit owns its resources and pursues growth in its respective domain at the best
possible pace that the domain can support, with all the agility and focus of a smaller company (See Figure 8).

27

CEO & Managing Director

R&D

Major
Markets

Corporate
HR

Corporate
Finance

Corporate
Affairs

Marketing

Legal

New
Growth
Markets

Strategic
Initiatives

Industry Solutions Units

Organizational infrastructure

Figure  8: Organization Structure designed for agility

Brand Building
The Company continued to implement global marketing initiatives to promote the TCS brand. All marketing communications –
including advertising, promotions and sponsorships – tend to be understated, designed to strengthen the trust clients repose in
the Company when they outsource the development and upkeep of key mission-critical systems to us, along with other key
attributes they most appreciate in our work: high quality, reliability and dependability. TCS' tagline, “Experience Certainty”
captures the essence of these attributes.
TCS evaluates the health of the corporate brand at regular intervals in select markets. The evaluation is benchmarked against a
pre-defined competitive set, and along specific image and personality parameters that include attributes such as 'ethical' and
'trustworthy'. The Company's marketing and communications strategy is fine-tuned based on findings from this brand survey.
TCS participated in leading industry and business events around the world and held key customer summits world-wide
reaffirming its commitment to delivering a complete brand and organizational experience.
Apart from its regular branding activities, TCS also continues to invest in building the brand in the digital space using premium
business and technology channels as well through focused branded properties and sponsorships. These include events and
activities in sports such as motor sports, cricket, marathons and distance running events. Lastly, TCS continued to articulate the
brand promise internally using the various channels and internal marketing assets and leveraged them to activate the brand
amongst the associates as well as other important stake holders.

28

Some of TCS' sponsorships in FY 2015 are as below:
TCS is the technology partner of the Rajasthan Royals, the Jaipur franchise cricket team in the Indian
Premier League. TCS provides IT expertise to help the team analyze the players' performance, simulation
and other areas. In turn, TCS enjoys greater visibility among cricketing fans, with the RR players sporting
the TCS logo.

To reinforce TCS' brand attribute of commitment to excellence, the
Company sponsors various marathons across the world in order to
support the commitment to excellence of the participants.
These sponsorships also serve to reinforce TCS' commitment to
wellness, because they give us an opportunity to engage with runners,
their friends and family, and the broader community to drive home the
importance of fitness and health. In FY 2014, major marathons
sponsored by TCS were:
n
n
n
n
n
n
n

Standard Chartered Mumbai Marathon
World 10K Bangalore
Boston Marathon
Bank of America Chicago Marathon
ING New York City Marathon
TCS Amsterdam Marathon
BMW Berlin Marathon

TCS IT Wiz, India's biggest inter- school IT Quiz programme, started in 1999 as a part of
the educational Initiative to help build awareness about technology and provide a
window to the world of Information Technology for young students. In 2011 TCS
launched the first international edition in UAE.
TCS IT Wiz is a knowledge platform currently held in 14 cities across Indian and has
become a national benchmark in the inter-school quizzing circuit for the level of
research, the intensity with which teams compete and the sheer participation number
it draws. TCS IT Wiz provides a wider outlook to the students about Information
Technology and its trends as in the current global scenario; IT plays an integral role in
the knowledge economy and is a key enabler for success in diverse fields.
The platform provides an opportunity to learn outside the classroom, fosters
competitive spirit amongst students and triggers voluntary learning, and to prepare
them for the future.

Sustainability in Marketing
Being a services company catering to a purely B2B market, sustainability issues such as the environmental, health and safety
impacts of products and software solutions have limited relevance and hence are not directly applicable.
Likewise, product labeling requirements do not apply to the Company's business. Documentation of the custom applications the
Company builds for clients is as per mutually agreed specifications. System documentation is not governed by any regulation or
industry code. All TCS' marketing communications including advertising, promotions and sponsorships comply with the relevant
laws of the countries that TCS operates in. No instance of regulatory non-compliance in this area was brought to the Company's
attention in FY 2015.
The related issue of sustainable consumption also does not arise because TCS' clients are sophisticated consumers – mostly large
Global 2000 corporations that consume the Company's services rationally, in accordance with their business requirements,
staying within the vendor concentration limits specified by their risk oversight policies.

29

Financial Sustainability
Successful execution of TCS’ strategy for sustainable growth requires investments in building capacity, in people and in new
business initiatives. TCS’ business model has a financial profile characterized by strong cash generation, low capital needs, low
working capital requirements, negligible debt and very attractive Return on Equity. TCS is a near zero-debt company, funding its
11
growth entirely through internal accruals. TCS did not receive any significant governmental financial assistance in FY 2015.
These are structural attributes of the Company’s business model, and are sustainable. Equally important, TCS has a robust risk
management framework using which the Company scans the environment for potential risks to this sustainability and take
mitigative steps.
Strong cash flows
The Company’s growth is financed by cash generated from operations. As of March 31, 2015, Total Shareholder’s Equity stood at
$9,184.9 Mn (FY14: $9,213 Mn) of which Retained Earnings made up $10,669 Mn (FY14: $10,289 Mn).
As at March 31, 2015, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $3,275.9 Mn (FY14: $3,232.6 Mn) which includes
Bank Deposits of $2,697.9 Mn (FY14: $2,413.9 Mn). Net Cash generated from Operations was $3,462.3 Mn (FY14: $2,613 Mn).
The Company believes that it has sufficient cash from operations to meet its working capital requirements. In addition it has
short term working capital facilities with various commercial banks.
Shareholder Value delivered, year after year
In FY 2015, the Company paid a total dividend of $1.3 (`79) i.e. a payout ratio of 44.9% of the consolidated profits under IFRS,
(excluding special dividend).
TCS’ market capitalization as of March 31, 2015 was $ 79.593 Bn.

Our Sustainability Services

TCS Eco-Sustainability Services
Information Technology has a big role to play in driving the sustainability agenda for our customers.
TCS offers IT-led services in the 4 key areas/
Reporting & Disclosure | Compliance Management | Supplier Risk Management

Strategy
& Risk

To create significant impact, organizations need to consider the environmental efficiencies in their entire
value chain. The internal operations and business processes of an organization may only contribute a
fraction of the ecological impact of the entire value chain, as compared to the other components of the
value chain such as raw materials procurement, their manufacturing and processing, shipping and
transportation, use and disposal.
Sustainability Performance Mgmt | Energy Management | Water & Waste Management | Green IT

TCS continues to invest in building capabilities on the key aspects of the entire value chain to
create significant sustainability impact, and help its clients drive their sustainability agenda effectively
and efficiently.

Operations

Life Cycle Assessments | Product & Package Materials | DfE and PLM Integration | Low Carbon Logistics

Products
& Services

TCS differentiates itself as a trusted partner helping clients drive the sustainability agenda through the
thought leadership in this space, ability to innovate and co-create solutions, rich sustainability and industry
domain expertise and an established partnership ecosystem to provide the end-to-end solutions

Social Media Analytics | Product Info Through Mobile Apps | Smart Homes/Smart Meters

Driven by the cost and scarcity of resources, rapidly changing country and industry regulations,
transformation in the competitive landscape, and increasing investor interest, boardrooms and chief
executives recognize that sustainability is important for the future success of their business

Consumer
Influence

11] Excluding tax incentives applicable in specific locations. . Details of the Company’s Taxation are noted on page 142 of the annual report, available online at:
http://www.tcs.com/investors/Documents/Annual%20Reports/TCS_Annual_Report_2014-2015.pdf

30

Detailed view of TCS Eco-sustainability services
Reporting & Disclosures
Develop a robust data model to support the sustaibility processes and management procedures, leveraging our
“ecoBIDS” framework to meet customers eﬀorts toward voluntary disclosures

Strategy
& Risk

Compliance Management
TCS supports client with compliance process blue-printing, EHS systems implementation, as well as in creating,
verifying and submitting necessary documentation associated with the key regulations such as RoHS, REACH, etc.
Supplier Risk Assessments
TCS helps design, deploy, or enhance existing system(s) to monitor supplier sustainability performance and
risks periodically. We also have frameworks to proﬁle and rank suppliers, and identify diﬀerent sourcing options.

Eco-footprinting/baselining
Deploying “ECView” to baseline an oranization’s GHG Emissions under Scope 1, 2 and 3 in line with the
ISO 14064-1:2006 standard
Energy Management
TCS helps design and deploy an integrated energy management platform that covers all type of facilities and
energy sources across the enterprise operations.

Operations

Renewable Energy
TCS support organizations to arrive at an optimal energy mix, considering the relevant policies and technology
maturity of alternative energy resources.
Water & Waste Management | Sustainability Performance Management
We help Select, design and implement an integrated management platform on proprietary or COTS or bespoke
software to track, and monetize enterprise performance across energy, water, waste, and carbon dimensions
Green IT/Data Centers
As part of our larger IT infrastructure transformation framework, ‘itransform’ our ‘PowerInsight’ tool provides
real-time information about the power consumption of both the IT and the non-IT (cooling and lighting)
components in a data centre
LCAs for Eco Labeling & EPD
TCS Facilitates sustainability information disclosure for products for voluntary disclosure requirements such as
eco-labels to comply with enviornmental declarations and reporting frameworks

Products
& Services

Product & Package optimization | Sustainable materials
TCS helps model and understand the possible impacts of interventions across the product and package
composition towards product weight and material optimization, migration to more sustainable sources.
Integration of DfE with PLM | Digital Manufacturing
TCS helps future-proof new product development by integrating DfE principles in product design
Low Carbon Logistics
TCS can help improve network throughput with an innovative application of pull-based process design and
Theory of Constraints(ToCs) solution
Smart Meters/Smart Energy
Our Smart Integration framework merges diverse utility applications like customer portals, billing system, Meter
Data Management System(MDMS), Outage Management System (OMS), work & asset management systems.

Consumer
Inﬂuence

Product Information through Mobile Applications
Dedicated Mobile UX Design team, comprising user experience designers, and user researchers help identify
best means to share your product’s sustainability benef its.
Social Media Analytics
Through our social business solutions, engage, listen, analyze and respond to customers on diﬀerent
social channels

31

Our Workforce
Human capital is the largest factor in TCS' business and the sustainability of revenue growth is directly dependent on the
organization's ability to attract and retain the right talent in the right number.
TCS has a highly educated workforce, whose technical skills are greatly valued globally. Although employment is at will with one
month's notice period from either side for termination, employees have significantly higher bargaining power in this industry,
ensuring workers' interests are largely protected by the free market and less than 0.050% of the workforce is unionized in India,
which is TCS' largest region of operation.
TCS recognizes the criticality of human capital to the business and its sustainability, and has in place mature processes devoted
to attracting, retaining and developing this human capital, assessed at PCMM Level 5.
The total number of permanent employees12 (at the consolidated level) as on March 31, 2015 was 3,19,656 (End-FY14: 3,00,464).
It is a predominantly young workforce, with an average age of ~29.3 years at TCS Group level. A break-up of the workforce by
employee category and age is given below:

4% 1%
22%

30%

Middle Level, Male
Middle Level, Female
Junior Level, Male
Junior Level, Female
Senior Level, Male
Senior Level, Female

33%

10%

Figure 9: Break up of workforce by category

5%

1% 0.3%

8%

< 30 Yrs, Male
< 30 Yrs, Female
24%

37%

30-40 Yrs, Male
30-40 Yrs, Female
40-50 Yrs, Male
40-50 Yrs, Female
> 50 Yrs, Male
> 50 Yrs, Female

24%
Figure 10: Breakup of workforce by age

12] TCS does not have part time employees on the payroll.

32

Additionally, during FY15, TCS workforce on temporary basis comprised 22,906 individuals.

29%

Male
71%

Female

Figure 11: Breakup of temporary workforce

Diversifying the talent pool
With custom-tailored training programs and greater gender as well as cross-cultural sensitization, TCS has been able to expand
the talent pool from which to recruit, in terms of gender, geography and academic discipline.
TCS is an Equal Opportunity Employer and subscribes to the Tata Code of Conduct in embracing diversity in race, nationality,
religion, ancestry, marital status, gender, age, ethnic origin, physical ability and sexual orientation. Compensation levels are
merit-based, determined by qualification, experience levels, special-skills if any and performance. Gender and any of the other
diversity parameters don't play any part in determining compensation levels. TCS has a well-defined Diversity & Inclusion Policy.
The Company participates in the Tata group's Second Career initiative which offers job opportunities to women returning to the
workplace after a break in their careers. TCS also has an initiative called DAWN (Diversity and Women's Network), a support group
for women and minorities, that fosters inclusivity through collaborative dialogue. DAWN organizes leadership-connects,
mentoring, discussion forums, sensitization workshops, wellness sessions and reorientation programs for associates returning to
the workplace after long-leave. 'Culture Meter' aims to build appreciation in the workforce for different cultures and practices
across the globe through mailers, quizzes and other online resources.
As on March 31, 2015, women constituted 33 % (at the consolidated level) of TCS' workforce. The number of non-Indian
nationals in the Company's workforce stood at 33,152 (at the consolidated level), representing 122 different nationalities
(FY 2014: 118 nationalities). The breakup by nationality is provided in the figure below
Composition of International Workforce - TCS Consolidated
29.9%

Indians

12.1%

British

Others

Chilean
3.7%

Filippinos
Ecuadorian

10.4%

12.4%

Uruguayan
7.8%

Columbian
Chinese

89.6%

7.0%
3.1%

14.3%
6.3%

Talent Acquisition

3.4%

American
Mexican
Others

Figure 12: Break up of non-Indian workforce by nationality

The Company continues to attract high quality talent and has been able to successfully scale up the talent acquisition process.
The global workforce plan is structured in alignment with the short, medium and long term business plans. The consolidated
requirements are part-fulfilled by re-skilling / up-skilling existing unallocated associates and the balance fulfilled through
focused drives by the Talent Acquisition Group. Experienced professionals are recruited through online jobsites, head-hunters,
recruitment agencies and through employee reference schemes. Other sources of experienced talent include strategic initiatives
like M&A and in-sourcing.
The Company's talent acquisition strategy is strongly focused on Campus Recruitment of engineering graduates and has
invested in building relationships with universities across the world, as well as improving the quality of academic training at
engineering colleges. In FY 2015, TCS (at the consolidated level) recruited 67,123 employees, on a gross basis (FY 2014: 61,200).
Of this, 23,875 i.e. 36% of the hires on a gross basis were fresh graduates.

33

8.2%

India
Europe
Asia Pacific

0.6%

4.9%

22.4%

UK & Ireland
Emerging Markets
7.4%

North America
& Canada

1.2%

77.6%
Figure 13: Breakup of new employee hires by region

30.2%

3.7%

< 30 Yrs, Male
< 30 Yrs, Female
30-40 Yrs, Male
30-40 Yrs, Female

22.8%

1.2%
1.5%
0.3%

40-50 Yrs, Male
40-50 Yrs, Female
> 50 Yrs, Male
> 50 Yrs, Female

47.0%

Figure 14: Breakup of new employee hires by gender and age

The Academic Interface Program (AIP) helps build a robust high-quality, long-term relationship between the Company and
Academic Institutions
Faculty Development Programmes: TCS’ senior
associates conduct training programs for
faculty, to keep them abreast with technology
developments and an industry perspective.

Student Workshops: Sessions for students
on technical, managerial or soft-skills topics
to enhance competitiveness and
workplace-readiness.

Membership in Boards of Studies (BOS) /
Curriculum Committees: TCS helps 37 Boards
of institutes across India in revamping
curriculum as per current industry trends.

Project Support and Internships:
TCS provides internship opportunities
for students from Indian and
overseas institutions.

Student Awards: Sponsors the Best Student
and the Best Student Project awards.

Sponsorship of Academic Technical Events in
closed partner institutes.

Campus Commune
TCS has created a professional networking platform for campus recruits to connect, share, explore and collaborate with their
peers and TCS associates prior to joining the Company. Campus Commune aims to engage the campus community and sustain
an interest in a career at TCS. The platform provides users with timely information and updates about the Company, Initial
Learning Programme (ILP), applicable processes and other pertinent topics of interest.

34

TCS also plays a role in mentoring and guiding students to explore career opportunities within the Company by way of
experience sharing, discussions, awareness building on relevant industry trends, engaging through debates, polls and other
engagement practices and pertinent topics of interest.
CodeVita was launched in 2012 to provide a platform for Coding Enthusiasts in technical colleges to showcase their
programming skills. Code Vita has also been an opportunity for TCS to spot the brightest programming talent in the academia
and attract them into TCS.
ASPIRE, a mandatory online interactive programme for technical graduates, aims to prepare students offered jobs at TCS for the
ILP, ensure that they learn the basic concepts of IT, learn about the Company and sharpen their communication skills. The Aspire
modules are deployed online in an interactive and gamified manner, reaching more than 20,000 students.
Ignite – from Science to Software
The Ignite programme is a pioneering initiative to induct science graduates to TCS. Ignite has trained 1229 associates during
FY 2015. The technology-enabled, project based learning approach at Ignite evolves continuously leading to the development
of innovative digital assets.
Local Recruitment outside India
TCS is a multinational company with operations in 46 countries. Local recruitment is an integral part of TCS' staffing strategy in
each of these countries, spanning every level in the local organization. In FY 2015, TCS at a consolidated level recruited 15,596
employees outside India. The percentage of senior-level employees amongst local recruits was 5.5% at the TCS group level
(FY 2014: 5%).
Recruitment of new graduates is facilitated by the relationships built up with empanelled universities through TCS' Academic
Interface Programmes in different parts of the world. The brand awareness created by those programmes helps attract quality
talent when formally participating in their placement programmes and conduct on-campus interviews. Recruitment of
experienced professionals is done through empanelled recruitment agencies and head-hunters.
Local Subcontractors
A key element of the manpower demand fulfillment strategy is the need-based use of contractors, especially for assignments
which are of a short-term nature or which require skills not readily available or in sufficient numbers internally. For this purpose,
TCS maintains strong relationships with a network of empanelled vendors – staffing agencies and head-hunters – in every
country that TCS operates in. The Company taps into this network to find suitable candidates whenever the need arises. In case
those skills are needed on a longer term basis, TCS looks to build equivalent capabilities internally and eventually replace these
contractors with employees. In FY 2015, TCS spent $ 1084.4 Mn (7% of Rev) on subcontractors (FY14 $883 Mn, 6.6% of Rev).
Learning & Development
TCS' Integrated Competency And Management System enables systematic tracking of the training roadmap of the Company's
large workforce, while integrating skill assessment and individual development and providing employees an end-to-end view of
their learning and competency development needs, as well as their progress against the plan.
At the start of the year, every employee in consultation with her/his supervisor, works out a learning and development plan for
the year, based on their interests and aspirations as well as the needs of the specific project / Business Unit. Thereafter, the
employee goes through various training sessions and workshops as outlined in the plan. These could be through e-learning
sessions on in-house Learning Management System, external certifications, classroom sessions conducted by various technical
centers of excellence within TCS or Management Development Programmes (MDPs). Each associate is assessed biannually on the
progress made against this plan.
The newly launched Virtual ILP uses learning technologies to enhance the learning experience of trainees, with sessions
delivered digitally and each trainee undergoing a customized learning path based on their baseline assessment. Trainees are also
part of the various dedicated ILP and Technology related communities – that help them interact with senior leaders, Subject
Matter Experts, technologist, scientists and architects.
Average per capita training hours in FY 2015
Category

Male

Female

Senior management

17.8

17.9

Middle management

26.2

28.8

Junior management

73.7

82.4

Others/N/A

17.8

23.3

13] Local recruitment pertains to hiring persons who are from the specific region of the Company's operation
14] Local Subcontractors are subcontractors hired from the specific region of the Company's operation

35

In FY 2015, overall 2,599,768 learning days were invested towards competency development including training in thrust
technology areas. The breakup of this is as below:
0.2%

1.4%
10.6%

Senior
Middle
Junior
Other

87.8%
Figure 15: Breakup of learning days by employee category

Of this, around 136,552 learning days went into developing management skills and leadership qualities amongst employees
identified for managerial and leadership roles.
Training programmes at the entry level as well as the continuous learning programmes that cover technology, domain and
project management practices have been enhanced during the year to ensure that TCS develops the right competencies in its
workforce that can deliver and meet customers' business needs. This process, in turn, helps individuals drive growth in their
careers and realize their potential in different ways.
An internally designed development programme for first-time managers, ASCENT, was deployed during the fiscal year using the
high-tech virtual class room interaction. The programme has been initiated to equip First Time Managers to deliver better
business results, transformative leadership and trusted partnership for success. This versatile developmental workshop adopts a
creative and learner centric methodology to assist managers with critical behavioral skills to play their role effectively.
TCS places significant emphasis on training and grooming employees at all levels with a long term perspective that develops the
right competencies which help individuals drive growth in their careers and realize their potential in different ways to support
their continued employment and post retirement phase. In addition, HR also organizes multiple programmes on financial
management, health and other areas that assist them in managing career endings.

Talent Retention
TCS views talent retention as another critical success factor – as important as talent acquisition – and has invested heavily in
building an employee-friendly culture and developing mature people-processes towards improving it. The Company has been
assessed enterprise wide at P-CMM® Level 5 and retention programmes are considered best-in-class in the industry. Employee
retention has been enhanced through a wide range of competency enhancement and career growth options, role mobility,
challenging assignments, competitive and differential compensation, flexible working hours, a collaborative work environment,
rewards, recognition and benefits.
The outcomes of these retention programmes have also been best in class. The return to work and retention rates after parental
leave are at 71%. Most parental leave is taken by female associates. In FY15, 5 out of the 13 employees who opted for adoption
leave were men. In FY 2015, attrition in IT Services was 13.77% (on a LTM basis) while overall attrition, including BPO, stood at
14.8%. Of this, attrition caused by departures of new hires within the same year was 3.2%. Of total attrition, female employee
attrition was 34 %. Attrition levels are higher at junior levels – at 16.4%.

18.6%

16.1%

34.1%

65.9%
<30
30-39
40-49
10.9%

13.1%

>50 yrs

Figure 16: Break up of departures by age
(out of employee base in age group)

Male
Female
Figure 17: Breakup of departures by gender
(out of total attrition)

15] TCS is the world's first organization to achieve an enterprise-wide Maturity Level 5 on CMMI® and P-CMM® based on SCAMPISM, the most rigorous assessment methodology.

36

35.00%

31.80%
27.60%

30.00%
22.70%

25.00%

26.40%
20.80%

20.00%
13.40%

15.00%
10.00%
5.00%
0.0%
India

Europe

Asia Pacific

UK & Ireland

Emerging Markets

North America & Canada

Figure 18: Breakup of departures by region

Career Development
The Career Management Process operates with the philosophy of facilitating employee's Career Growth in TCS. CareerHub
provides a framework to help employees learn and grow. It operates in a dynamic manner to provide timely updates to fuel and
fast pace employees' career in the organization.
Career development though the CareerHub is divided into two processes- Inspire: The TCS Hi Potential Programme (HiPo) and
the iConnect process. The 'Inspire Programme' aims at identification, engagement and building of a robust leadership pipeline,
keeping in line with the organizational growth objectives. Under this programme special initiatives are taken for hi potential
employees (in senior and middle grades) at the ISU and organizational level to bring about more visibility to the high potential
employee in terms of positioning, allocations, projects and learning. HiPo's undergo exclusive focused leadership programmes to
help them move into higher roles. The iConnect process is for all other employees in junior to middle and equivalent grades. It
focuses on one on one discussions in areas ranging from career development to personal development .This process also allows
a mentee to directly reach out to a mentor of his/her choice. In both these processes mentees have a career discussion with their
chosen mentor and customized Individual Development Plan is created by mentor post discussion. A guide to the career paths in
TCS as well as mentoring success stories are published on the Career Hub.
At TCS, career processes are online and transparent, with a holistic view of aspirations, mentoring, and developmental
interventions, as well as an opportunity to share their feedback online. My Career Eureka is a social media platform for associates
to connect for insights and plan their careers in TCS. In this community, associates have a common ground to blog, discuss, clarify
and develop a better understanding about their careers as well as to connect with domain experts.
Employees can voice their views and inputs on the career processes through the Career Eureka community on the internal social
networking platform. This community launched in late 2013, has been successful in responding to associates' queries in real time,
sharing inspirational success stories of mid-level and senior associates, and also for receiving guidance through a one-to-many
mentoring opportunity. The community is also used to crowd-source ideas and use this platform to constantly develop and
improvise on the Company's career planning tools.
Competitive Compensation Model
TCS has to attract and retain talent in a highly competitive labor market. The workforce consists of mainly software engineers
who hold engineering graduate and post-graduate degrees and even entry-level wages of engineers in any country tend to be
several times higher than the minimum wage in that country. TCS' employee cost over the last three years is given below:

Employee Costs in USD Mn

FY 2013

FY 2014

FY 2015

6,549

7,544

8,940.4

16

16] Excluding impact of $423 Mn paid as Special One-time Bonus to employees

37

To ensure competitiveness in the pursuit of talent, TCS regularly benchmarks its compensation plans and benefits¹⁷ with those
offered by peers. There is also a skill-based allowance for employees possessing niche skills, designed to motivate employees to
acquire marketable skills thereby benefiting themselves as well as the company.
Compensation structures are driven by prevailing practices in the different countries TCS operates in. But across the enterprise,
remuneration is the same for men and women working at the same location and in the same grade.¹⁸ In India, in addition to a
fixed component of the salary, there is a variable component linked to the Economic Value Added (EVA). Payout of that
component depends on organizational performance as well as individual performance. This alignment of the Company's
interests and the individual's interests has the effect of strengthening team spirit and improving collaboration amongst teams.
Reward and Recognition
Subscribing to a performance based culture, TCS has several schemes for recognizing and rewarding employees. TCS Gems is the
formal, global online employee recognition platform for managing all the rewarding mechanisms at TCS. Some of the popular
awards are Star of the Month and Quarter Awards, On the Spot Award, Best Programme and Project Manager Awards, Star Team
Award, Beyond Performance Award, Service Awards, appreciation certificates. Associates can choose their reward from a variety
of redemption options ranging from electronic items, utility products, gift vouchers, travel accessories, charity and more.
Other forms of rewarding outstanding performance include fast-track promotions, sponsorship of external training and
certification programmes, assignment to key positions, membership to professional bodies, sponsorship to international
conferences, public announcements of individual/team achievements on the intranet, internal magazines, town hall meetings
and so on.
Challenging Assignments
The importance of work content and an individual's quest for self-actualization can never be overstated. By virtue of its broad
footprint across geographies, across industries and appetite for executing large complex projects, TCS offers plenty of
opportunities for ambitious individuals who seek challenging assignments and exposure to different kinds of roles, technologies
and geographies. This has been an important aspect of TCS' best-in-class ability to retain high performers.
Employee engagement and motivation
Communication within TCS has moved to the next level thanks to Knome, TCS's internal social networking portal. From the
traditional one-dimensional mode of communicating to multi-dimensional engagement, the organization caters to its largely
young audience through this social network. TCS associates across the globe can now post their views, suggestions and
questions at one place, and also expect to get feedback through comments and answers from other associates. TCS' senior
leadership engage regularly with associates through blogs and live chat sessions, which has ensured that that the voice of a
regular associate is not just heard, but 'actioned' upon by the top management.
Besides, the simplification journey within TCS will usher in an era where employees will get their work done faster, in a more
efficient way through effective and easier processes.
Employee retention and motivation are greatly facilitated through closer engagement with employees and by fostering a spirit
of community, through shared activities outside of work. TCS sponsors picnics and social gatherings at every location so
employees and their families get together under informal settings. Another forum for employees and their families to participate
in and develop sense of camaraderie is TCS Maitree, which harnesses their energy and enthusiasm to undertake activities for the
betterment of the local communities and the environment.
TCS takes an active interest in the wellbeing of employees and has actively supported athletic and sporting events at the
national, regional and local level. The company encourages employees to participate in these activities on a regular basis and
stay fit.
Commitment to Human Rights
A strong commitment to human rights is an integral part of the Tata Code of Conduct. All employees, including security
personnel, are sensitized to human rights as part of the induction into the company. TCS' commitment to human rights
principles is reflected in the various check and balances including a robust grievance redressal system within the HR processes.
TCS' commitment extends to subsidiaries, and the Company takes care that the same is practiced by vendors as well.
With respect to vendors, TCS follows a rigorous screening process before entering into a business relationship. All the contracts
that the Company enters into with vendors require the vendor to comply with the relevant laws safeguarding labour rights and
human rights in their respective jurisdiction.
No incident of discrimination or non-compliance with human rights was brought to TCS' notice by any of the Company's
business partners in FY2015. As on March 31st 2015, TCS had no pending grievances relating to human rights.

17] TCS offers gratuity, a defined benefit retirement plan for eligible employees in India and in certain overseas locations. The plan provides for a lump sum payment to
vested employees at retirement, death while in employment or on termination of employment. Total benefit obligation at the end of FY2015 stood at $325.1 Mn.
18] Remuneration for men and women at the same location and grade is in the ratio 1:1

38

Initiatives like TCS Fit4Life and Purpose4Life have enthused employees to take care of their fitness, and in giving back to the
society respectively. The company encourages associates to participate in these initiatives by forming teams, and
'gamification' done through their respective portals. Through Fit4Life, TCS' CEO himself encourages employees to form teams
and pursue a passion for running. TCS' sponsorship of the Mumbai Marathon, the World 10K Bangalore and other long-distance
events across the world has sparked widespread interest in fitness and running.

Employee Wellness and Safety
Health and Wellness
TCS encourages employees to regularly participate in sporting and fitness activities to ensure they stay fit. A culture of fitness is
evident in the wide range of initiatives available to employees within TCS campuses, including yoga and aerobics, coaching in
tennis and badminton, as well as cricket and football tournaments.
TCS has introduced Fit4Life and Purpose4Life to motivate employees to take care of their fitness, and in giving back to the society
respectively. The initiatives are designed to create an environment of fun, while maintaining camaraderie in competition,
encouraging associates to participate through forming teams, and 'gamification'
through portals.
Through Fit4Life, TCS' CEO himself encourages employees to form teams and
pursue a passion for running. TCS' sponsorship of the Mumbai Marathon, the
World 10K Bangalore and other long-distance events across the world has sparked
widespread interest in fitness and running. Associates are encouraged to make an
annual commitment of fitness hours on the Company's fitness portal.
Similarly, Purpose4Life is aimed at ensuring mental and social well-being of
employees. It is designed to motivate and enable TCS' associates to contribute
towards societal well-being by providing a platform that could channelize the
effort and leverage the extensive geographical reach. As part of this initiative,
each TCS associate is encouraged to commit a minimum of 10 hours in a year
towards activities that would be based on TCS' CSR themes of Education,
Health and Environment.

39

Case Studies on Health and Well-Being
Pedometer Challenge
To support national walking month in May 2014, TCS UK ran a Pedometer challenge. Associates across all TCS locations in UK
participated in teams.
Each team recorded their weekly steps and submitted their results to UK HSE team. Weekly results were communicated to all
throughout the challenge with supporting educational and motivating messages, which kept the teams engaged and
committed to doing well in the challenge.
A trophy was awarded to the winning team ‘The Peterborough Pace Setters’.
National Stress Awareness Day
Stress at work is one of the leading causes of people taking leave from work. Beyond a certain limit, stress can become a
disability like any other mental health condition.
Well-being days were undertaken at a number of delivery centres in UK with the following activities
n
n
n

On site Massage
Laughter Yoga
Mindfulness

The day was a great success, it created a “feel good” factor and raised awareness of UK HSE team and its role in relation to
workplace health and wellbeing.

Occupational Health & Safety
TCS' commitment to provide a healthy and safe work environment to all associates and partners on TCS premises is articulated
in the organization's Occupational Health & Safety (OHS) Policy which translates into the objectives and targets towards
inculcating safe behavior.
Occupational Health & Safety Objectives and Targets
Objectives
Building a safety culture and
inculcating safe work practices
among associate & contractors

Goals
Providing training for associates
contractors

Target
1 hour per associate per year
2 hours per contract staff per year

Creating general awareness

1 awareness communication per month
1 awareness campaign per quarter

Providing safe workplaces and
compliance to H&S
management system &
regulatory requirements

H&S inspections for all the Sites

One annual inspection per site

Compliance to H&S legal and
HSE-MS requirements

100%

Incident Reporting and
implementation of
remedial measures

Reporting of accidents and near miss
incidents

Increase in number of reporting

Resolution of incidents reported and
effectiveness of measures

100%

Taking the commitment to employee safety one level higher, TCS' CEO launched the SafetyFirst Initiative in May 2014 to make
Safety every TCSers way of life by reaching out to associates. SafetyFirst was launched with the ambition to become a zero fatality
organization with four areas of focus – Health failures, Accidents, External violence and Self Harm.

19] Full text of TCS' Occupational Health and Safety Policy is available on the TCS website. The URL is:
http://www.tcs.com/about/corp_responsibility/health-safety-policy/Pages/default.aspx

40

“...Our mission of zero fatalities can be achieved not just by
policies and processes, but by individual participation and
commitment. I urge each and every TCSer to reﬂect on
the need to ensure our own personal safety and security at all
times and make sure our colleagues are safe too. This should
extend beyond our workplaces and include our
personal lives too...”
TCS strives for beyond compliance leadership in occupational health and safety across all locations globally. 99 locations across
TCS are certified to OHSAS 18001:2007 Occupational Health and Safety Management System, which is integrated with the
organization's Quality Management System. The Board-level Health, Safety and Sustainability committee and Corporate
Sustainability Council review the health and safety performance on regular basis.
The key generic occupational health & safety risks identified typical to TCS' nature of operations include ergonomic risks, road
safety in company provided transport, indoor air quality, fire and other general office risks including slips, trips, falls, electrical
shock, etc. Hazard identification and risk assessment has helped identify workplace risks and ensure sufficient and suitable
mitigation measures are put in place for a healthy and safe work environment.
TCS is also proactively monitoring safety at all the new facilities that are coming up at various locations across India. Deployment
of safety processes and systems is mandated with effective tracking of lead as well as lag safety indicators in order to maintain a
comprehensive oversight of safety performance.
Employee engagement is the key pillar of safety initiatives at TCS. Induction training for new employees along with continuous
learning programs strengthen the occupational health and safety awareness amongst all levels of employees. In FY 2015, over
390,000 man-hours of training through classroom sessions, induction trainings and web based training on Health, Safety and
Environment have been imparted. Several campaigns like the Road Safety Awareness, Ergonomics Awareness, Incident reporting
engage associates to make them more aware and safety conscious.

Ergonomics Awareness Campaign (Oct 2014)
Ergonomics training sessions

Ergonomics session conducted
in local schools@Delhi

Floorwalk@Hyderabad
MSD Check-up@Kolkata

Good oﬀice
ergonomics is a habit
that has to be
practiced regularly
and can improve your
concentration and
productivity at work.
Ergonomics campaign
was designed to
educate associates on
oﬀice ergonomics –
sitting posture and
workstation stretches.
The campaign saw
participation from
over 70,000 associates.

41

Road Safety Campaign 2015
Road Safety Campaign
is an annual event
observed across TCS to
engage associates and
business partners.
During the two week
campaign different
activities ranging from
display of informative
banners, screening of
movies, training for
associates as well as
contract drivers,
information mailers
and various contests
were organized.

“You have got a
ticket!!”- Dummy
Challan activity was an
instant hit at every
location... It was a funfilled activity where
challans were given to
those who did not
follow the basic road
rules and those who
followed safety rules
were given a rose with a
Safety Pledge.

With the intent to
inculcate Road Safety as
a culture in future
citizens and TCSers, in
2015, the Road Safety
campaign was
expanded beyond TCS
and to schools,
associate’s children and
educational institutes
from where TCS recruits.

Engaging Associates

1

4

7

2

3

5

6

1 - Dummy challan activity @ Lucknow
2 - Floorwalk @ Baroda
3 - Slogan board @ Bangalore
4 - Motor driving training @ Trivandrum
5 - Vehicle check-up camp @ Kochi
6 - Safety zone @ TCS UK
7 - Road safety model @ Bangalore

FOLLOW
SPEED
LIMIT

Engaging Contractors

1

3

2

4

5

1 - Road safety training
@ Delhi
2 - Road safety training
@ Hyderabad
3 - Video screening
@ Bhubaneswar
4 - Eye check up camp
@ Bangalore
5 - Road safety training
@ Bangalore

FOLLOW
SPEED
LIMIT

Engaging the Future Generations

1

2

3
1 - Poster making contest for kids @ Delhi
2 - Road safety awareness session as a part of
AIP in colleges
3 - An associate’s kid exploring the kiosk @ Kochi

42

FOLLOW
SPEED
LIMIT

Injury Data
Typical to any service sector company operating out of office-based premises, most common injuries occur due to slips, trips and
falls or being struck by stationary objects, etc. Road accidents in company provided transport is also a key focus area. The prime
focus is on capturing all types of incidents that include accidents, near-misses and safety observations and ensure 100% closure
of the reported incidents with effective corrective and preventive actions. With the launch of SafetyFirst, the incident
reporting increased significantly within the organization as more and more associates became aware of the importance of
reporting incidents.

Table 1. Work-related injuries by severity of injury
Severity of Injury

Number of Injuries

Fatality

1

Lost Time Injury

70

Medical Treatment Injury

27

First-aid Injury

60

Break up of high severity injuries
GENDER BREAK-UP
40

38

40

33
61

100
50
0

20
0
Male

20
10

TCSer

Female

Figure 19: Break-up by Gender

BREAK-UP BY ACCIDENT TYPE
34
27

BREAK-UP BY PERSON

Contract
Staff

Figure 20: Break-up by Person Type

8

0

Road
Accident

Slip,
trip, falls

Caught
between
of struck
by object

2
Others

Figure 21: Break-up by Accident Type

Lost time injury frequency rate
0.09

0.100

0.08

0.080
0.060
0.040

0.05

0.047
0.035

0.020
2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

Figure 22: Lost Time Injury Frequency Rate (Year-on-Year trend)

Figure 22 Lost Time Injury Frequency Rate (LTIFR) - number of lost time injuries per million man-hours worked (TCS associates +
contract staff working in TCS offices).

20] Most of the injuries reported are from India geography. One work related fatality occurred in India geography where a security contract staff was fatally injured in a road
accident in TCS provided transport, while escorting a lady associate. The lady associate and driver also incurred major injuries
21] High severity injuries include fatalities and lost time injuries
22] Only work related fatalities and lost time case have been considered from all geographies. It does not include the lost time cases on road in personal or public transport
involving associates travelling to and from work. These cases are tracked internally and reviewed and Road Safety awareness campaigns are aligned to sensitize
employees on Road Safety

43

Our Community
Being part of the Tata group, TCS has a unique relationship with society at large. This section, highlights TCS’ global CSR initiatives
– through volunteering, sponsorships and pro bono leveraging of TCS’ IT core capabilities – in the areas of Education & Skill
Building, Health, Environment and Affirmative Action.
Tata Sons Ltd, the holding company of the Tata group, owns close to 75% of TCS. Around two-thirds of the equity of Tata Sons Ltd
is held by various philanthropic trusts – the largest being the Sir Dorabji Tata Trust and Sir Ratan Tata Trust – which have created
and nurtured leading national institutions for science and technology, medical research, social studies and the performing arts.
These trusts also provide aid and assistance to various non-government organizations working in the areas of education,
healthcare and livelihoods. More details of the work funded by these trusts can be found on their websites
(http://www.dorabjitatatrust.org and www.srtt.org).
Close to 49% of the dividend paid out by TCS each year goes towards the Tata Trusts and the philanthropic work carried out. It is
a source of tremendous pride and motivation to associates that that their efforts and contribution to the company’s success
results in tangible benefit to society on a large scale
Direct and Indirect Economic Impact
The most significant, direct economic impact TCS has is the productivity benefits that clients gain from the automation of their
various business processes using the IT applications. Greater cost-efficiency and productivity at a firm-level translates into higher
productivity for the larger economy. Therefore, TCS has had a significant role in the transformational phase of the global
economy, marked by significant productivity gains from the deployment of IT.
The productivity benefits from the Company’s IT-related work directly translate into community benefits when TCS engages with
various governments to digitize their operations, particularly in the area of citizenry services. DigiGovTM, an integrated system
which facilitates optimized planning and execution among government departments thereby impacting the working of
government functions, is an example of TCS’ service. The Company does not believe that any part of its operations has a potential
or actual negative impact on the communities with whom it works.
TCS’ profitable global operations result in payment of corporate taxes applicable in multiple countries. Thereby, funding the
governments indirectly to help improve the quality of their civic services. Tax expense relating to overseas operations is
determined in accordance with tax laws applicable in countries where such operations are domiciled and provided for. In FY
2015, TCS provided for a total tax expense of $1,087 Mn. Based on NASSCOM’s figures for the entire sector, it is estimated that TCS
contributed 1% to India’s GDP and TCS’ share of India’s exports in FY 2015 is over 5%.
Direct and Indirect Employment
TCS' strategy of a distributed delivery capability, tapping into the local talent in each delivery location has resulted in a largely
balanced, positive economic impact through employment generation both direct and indirect. Direct employment results in the
creation of tens of thousands of white-collar jobs, broadening the tax collections at the local, state and central levels.
Each delivery center has over a thousand employees. The construction of these massive campuses employs architects, engineers
and construction workers. Once the facility is commissioned, the center opens up tremendous local employment opportunities
for skilled workers while the vendor-partners hire housekeeping staff, security guards, drivers, gardeners, maintenance workers,
chefs, cafeteria staff etc.
The creation of these jobs creates a massive demand for local housing in the surrounding areas Moreover, the beneficiaries of
these net new jobs are often young (median age of the workforce: ~29 years) and therefore tend to display high consumption
patterns, benefiting local businesses and by extension, the local economies.
All in all, it is conservatively estimated that TCS generates 29 indirect jobs for every 10 direct jobs. Taking these indirect jobs into
account, TCS' consolidated, global employment generation footprint is estimated at over 910,000.
Infrastructure Development
The setting up of delivery centers promotes infrastructure development to accommodate the resultant growth within the
communities. Local municipalities respond to the growing needs of the community. An improvement in transport infrastructure
and connectivity as well as an improvement in electricity and water supply is expected outcomes of this growth.
Private and public sector partners respond to these developments by offering their services in areas including telecom,
healthcare, education etc.

23] Source: NASSCOM

44

Broad based Regional Development
Historically, the emergence of the Indian IT industry occurred in the four large metropolitan cities of New Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai
and Kolkata Further expansion to Bangalore and Hyderabad occurred with a view to take advantage of the available engineering
talent and supporting infrastructure.
Recognizing the multiplier effect that the IT-BPO industry has on local economies, various state governments are encouraging IT
companies to establish centers in smaller cities. This is to broad-base the resultant economic development beyond just the Tier I
cities With a view to leverage benefits of low costs and a motivated local workforce, the IT-BPO industry has started establishing
centers in Tier II and Tier III cities TCS has been leading this foray with headcount in Tier II/III cities steadily growing as a
percentage of the Company's total India headcount over the last 4 years.
Intangible benefits
TCS associates are well educated, well-groomed young professionals. Almost a one third of the Company's workforce comprises
of women. The experience of working within a global company and among highly qualified individuals allows employees to
redefine preconceived notions and broaden their horizons. The evidence of social progress and individual prosperity influences
parents to invest in their children's education. Girls in traditional communities find inspiration to seek higher education and
pursue corporate careers. As a result there is a positive impact on community outlook and behavior.

Corporate Social Responsibility: Nurturing People and Planet
Tata Consultancy Services Limited is an IT services, business solutions, and outsourcing organization that delivers real results to
global businesses, ensuring a level of certainty no other firm can match. Within its CSR activities, TCS increasingly employs the
use of technology as a key enabler to assist and resolve business challenges faced by social organizations and to tackle
development issues faced by diverse communities globally.
The CSR committee of the Board was constituted on April 16, 2014. The Committee is responsible for recommending to the board
a CSR policy as well as the expenditure, monitoring the CSR policy from time to time, overseeing the activities impacting the
quality of life of various stakeholders and overseeing the Company's corporate and societal obligations.
The core themes for TCS' CSR programmes are:
n

Education & Skill Development

n

Health

n

Environment

Programs under Education include IT enabled modules and advisory systems for learning and creating an interest and enabling
an interest in IT.
1. Adult Literacy Programme
The Computer-Based Functional Literacy (CBFL) software was designed by TCS to promote Adult Literacy. It is available in 9
Indian languages and 3 foreign languages namely, Northern Sotho (South Africa) and Moore (West Africa) and Arabic. Since
inception, the programme has reached 2,31,178 beneficiaries which include prison inmates in New Delhi and Lucknow.
The CBFL software is available on www.tcsion.com/ALP
2. BPS Employability Programme
In 2010, TCS initiated a programme to train economically and
socially disadvantaged candidates for BPS jobs and then absorb
some of them based on the company's requirements. TCS has
dedicated itself towards addressing the issue of lack of exposure
to contemporary skills within India. Certificates being distributed
at PuneTCS launched a simple yet powerful employability
training programme for marginalised youth across India. This
Employability Training Programme comprises 80 - 100 hours of
interactive content designed to develop skills that increase their
chances of finding employment. The training provides an
effective platform for the development of communication skills,
corporate etiquette, interview skills, resume building and basic
computer knowledge. The recruitment process for entry level
jobs is conducted by TCS BPS post the training. In the last 3 years,
the programme has trained 56,631 students with a cumulative reach of 16,676 SC/ST youth through training programmes in
over 160 geographic locations. Over 3,626 of these trained youth have found employment at TCS BPS.

45

3. UDAAN, initiative for increasing employability of Kashmiri Youth

Enabling youth from Kashmir to connect with Indian Industry

TCS was the first organisation in India to sign an MOU
with the National Skill Development Corporation
(NSDC) to promote employability among youth from
Jammu & Kashmir. TCS endeavours to catalyze the
Kashmiri youth connect with Indian industry, along
with enhancing their skills, thus making them more
employable. Through 14 weeks of training designed
by TCS, Udaan seeks to improve industry relevant
skills relevant and increase employment
opportunities available to them. The Company
trained 200 candidates in FY 15 of which 126 were
offered jobs in TCS. 75% of the candidates were
mobilised through Indian Army under Operation
Megh Rahat, described by Armymen as their “biggest
flood relief and rescue exercise so far”.

4. IT Employability Programme
TCS' Affirmative Action approach has incorporated a
focus on improving the employability quotient of
socially and economically backward students from
rural engineering colleges. Enabling business skills
and technical training through IT EmployabilityIn
2014, TCS launched on a new initiative to promote
employability within IT. Students in the 5th
semester of four engineering colleges in Andhra
Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and
Maharashtra, have received training through a
specially designed 200 hour module to promote
employability in the IT sector. In FY 15, 295 Students
have completed this programme and from among
them 105 students got placed in various Corporates
including TCS.
Enabling business skills and technical training through IT Employability
5. Computer Operator cum Programming Assistant (COPA) ITI Training
This Faculty Development Programme for Industrial Training Institute (ITI) instructors has helped to enhance the
capability of the faculty, so that the quality and course delivery is in line with the latest industry practices. In
coordination with TCS' technology specialists, TCS has trained COPA faculty from ITIs located in Uttar Pradesh, Haryana,
Gujarat, West Bengal, Maharashtra, Odisha, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu.
In FY 15, 67 Faculty from various ITIs across 3 states have been trained and certified by TCS.

6. Advanced Computer Training Center (ACTC)
Addressing skill deficit leading to unemployment among visually impaired in India, TCS created IT-enabled vocational
courses that are in sync with the industry requirements in addition to providing training in personality development
and corporate etiquette. The Advanced Computer Training Center for Visually Impaired (ACTC) has trained 156
individuals while facilitating employment for 119 candidates across multiple companies. 5 of these trainees are
currently pursuing higher studies.

46

7. IT Wiz
CEO N. Chandra felicitating the winners of the TCS IT WIZUnder
CSR, the Company has also used quizzing as a medium to
create an interest in IT. TCS IT Wiz, the biggest inter school IT
Quiz programme in India, started in 1999 as a part of the
educational Initiative to build awareness and hone IT skills for
young students. The programme is the first and the largest
powerful knowledge platform of this scale, on information
technology for students of class 8-12.
The TCS IT Wiz, which was held between August and November
2014 across 14 locations in India— Ahmedabad, Bangalore,
Bhubaneswar, Chennai, Coimbatore, Delhi, Hyderabad, Indore,
Kochi, Kolkata, Lucknow, Mumbai, Nagpur and
Pune—witnessed over 18,432 students of class 8-12 from over
1,900 schools participating at the Regional level.

CEO N. Chandra felicitating the winners of the TCS IT WIZ

8. Rural IT Quiz

Promoting inclusive growth through the Rural IT Quiz

TCS has partnered with the Government of
Karnataka to start India's first Rural IT Quiz in
2000. The Quiz aims at enhancing IT
awareness among students from rural areas,
promoting inclusive growth and building
their confidence. The Rural IT Quiz currently
reaches rural students in Madhya Pradesh,
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Chattisgarh and
Rajasthan. The 15th edition of the Rural IT
Quiz was conducted in the states of Gujarat,
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Chattisgarh,
Rajasthan and Karnataka this year. The
programme witnessed participation from
over 8,000 schools.

9. InsighT
The programme is designed to meet the ISE, CBSE and State Board syllabus in India and uses a case study
methodology with a practical approach. InsighT seeks to promote team building, leadership, communication, and
presentation skills, along with technical skills. This year, InsighT was run in 36 schools reaching 2,040 students.

10. BridgeIT
BriDgeIT is a unique project to demonstrate the use of IT as
a key enabler in school education, adult literacy and
creation of entrepreneurs in the Bundelkhand region. This
project is implemented in Jhansi and Lucknow districts of
Uttar Pradesh and in Tikamgarh district of Madhya Pradesh
and Yadgir in Karnataka. This is a joint venture with the
National Confederation of Dalit Organisations (NACDOR)
for UP, MP and Kalike for Karnataka, who provide field level
support in identifying the schools and in the identification
of young entrepreneurs; and Pratham as the domain
expert is providing support in child education. Supporting
Computer Aided Learning in government schools in
Jhansi. FY 15, the programme reached 1,471 school
children through computer aided learning, 140 adults
through the adult literacy programme and also provided
support to 31 entrepreneurs.

Supporting Computer Aided Learning
in government schools in Jhansi

47

11. Empower
Through Empower, TCS aims at building capacity and
capabilities of its support staff at various TCS offices and
bridge the gap between service staff and TCS associates.
Modules of the training include acquiring basic
communication through English and other relevant soft
skills. Participants and trainers of an Empower batch at a
TCS office in BangaloreIn FY15, 826 beneficiaries received
training under the Empower programme across 8 locations.

Participants and trainers of an Empower batch at a TCS office in Bangalore

12. Sanitation Project
On a national scale, TCS pledged INR 100 crore to the 'Swachh Bharat, Swachh Vidyalaya Abhiyan' to build dedicated
sanitation facilities for girl students in adopted government schools. The programme is being rolled-out in a phase-wise
manner, with 860 schools targeted in Phase-1.
13. STEM focus – North America
goIT is TCS' signature community engagement program
in North America, through which the Company's
employees teach computer programming and mentor
youth to increase STEM education and career awareness.
Offered free of cost for middle and high school students,
the goIT programme covers career awareness
workshops, hands-on technology education, teacher
trainings and parent orientations. Students learn iconbased programming languages as they engage in
hands-on, project based challenges. In turn, goIT
participants acquire critical thinking and problem
solving skills while troubleshooting designs and
learning in a team environment.Students participating
in the goIT programme

TCS' skill based volunteers engaging with students

Since its launch in 2009, goIT has engaged more than
8,800 North American students across 12 cities and
50 school districts, with promising results. In 2014, goIT attracted over 1,800 new students, engaged over 350 employee
volunteers, resulting in over 20,000 hours of high-impact skill building and computer science programming for students,
including those from underserved groups, minorities and girls. TCS partners with numerous organizations across the U.S.
and Canada to successfully implement and sustain goIT programmes.
To support a national technology infrastructure for STEM mentoring, TCS is leading the development of mentoring
platforms for US2020, a national initiative that will match one million STEM mentors with students at youth-serving nonprofits for high impact mentoring by
the y ear 2020. TCS also supports
Million Women Mentors (MWM), a
national initiative that will match one
million STEM mentors with girls and
early career women by 2018 to engage
mentors for students in need. TCS is
also a partner for the National Center
for Women & Information Technology's
(NCWIT) Clinton Global Initiative
commitment to scale the AspireIT
program and engage 10,000 middle
school girls in learning computing
concepts.
Students participating in the goIT programme

48

14. APAC
Expansion of efforts to promote interest in IT & technology
in APAC continues through Go for IT! and Work Placements
Programmes. Go for IT! is a one week structured and
intensive work placement initiative designed to encourage
girls to consider IT as a career. TCS employees interact with
the trainees also sharing their personal experiences,
providing insight into their current roles and thereby
increasing the students' enthusiasm towards IT. Till date, the
programmes have reached 6,500+ students.
In FY15, the programmes reached 63 students, in 13 schools
with associates pledging over 130 hours of volunteer time.
86% of students said that their participation in the TCS Work
Experience programme has inspired them to study IT and
100% felt that their knowledge of the IT Industry has
increased exponentially.

Participants of the Go for IT! programme in China

15 “Education to Careers” - MEA
In the Middle East and Africa, IT awareness in schools, Graduate Development Programmes and Customer Training in
IT address the global “Education to Careers” theme. Till date, 30 graduates have been trained and employed; 2 IT
Training centers built for marginalized communities and 2000+ customer employees trained. In Africa, TCS is a Level 2
BEEE contributor.
16 IT Futures
In UK TCS is seen as enthusing young people into
technology through its IT Futures. The programme seeks
to engage students at critical stages in education, while
strengthening the ability of educators to deliver effective
training and relevant skills. Through IT Futures, TCS
facilitated IT application development for 160 schools, IT
challenges to students through 100 school workshops,
100 work placements at TCS and 12 Universities involved
in programmes where students provide IT solutions to
local charities. As part of this programme, TCS is proud to
be a founding donor of the Queen Elizabeth Prize for
Engineering. 63% of students reached by IT Futures
indicated that they will consider an IT career and 90%
f teachers say that the programme has triggered an
interest in technology.
In Europe, youth summer camps and technical skill
enhancements programmes have been instrumental in
encouraging an interest in IT. This year, goIT was also
launched in Sweden & Germany.

Participants of the Go for IT! programme in China

17 ENABLE
In LATAM, a programme focusing on Social & Economic empowerment of the differently abled was launched. Through
ENABLE 3000 Volunteering hours were invested and 21 associates hired in post the training. TCS received the Best
Volunteering Company (Red Cross, Ecuador) and Company with Best Social Service Practices (Foundation Tierra Nueva of
Carollo Father).

49

18 Pro bono IT offerings
The Company works to provide pro bono end to end consultancy and architect comprehensive solutions to enable social
organizations to be efficient and accountable.
The Tech CSR team in India has been instrumental in leveraging core competencies and capabilities (i.e. feasibility
assessment, business & process analysis, prioritization of aspirations, design, development and consulting) for social
programmes and initiatives. A bulk of non-government organizations (NGO) struggle in visualizing and functioning with
corporate style efficiencies.
The team uses IT as a key enabler to assist such organizations in analyzing and highlighting areas of improvement and
suggesting processes and systems to increase the organizations' efficiency. This has assisted NGOs in highlighting
increased visibility of their programme activities and initiatives - to their teams, management and donors. This in turn
translates into enhancement of NGOs overall experience due to increase in efficiency, credibility and accountability
which is substantiated by fact based statistics.
In FY15 the Tech CSR Team has focused on supporting multiple health based initiatives for organizations like Retina India
Foundation (Indian Retina Repository) and Operation Smile (Patient Management System). The team has also prepared a
Case Management System to assist Justice and Care in tracking human trafficking cases.
An integrated Hospital Management System and IT infrastructure which includes a comprehensive and fully integrated,
web-based solution has been provided free of cost to the Cancer Institute at Chennai. Since its inception at the Cancer
Institute in 2010, the system has enabled 80,000+ new patient registrations, 500,000+ doctor consultations and 50,000
hospital admissions. TCS is continuing to support Cancer Institute by continuously enhancing the system in alignment
with the needs of Cancer Institute. A new module to support the Chemotherapy function is under development. This
year saw an increase of 37% in the laboratory investigations being reported in the system, a direct result of the
automation of laboratory equipment interface with the Hospital Management System.
TCS also designed and implemented a comprehensive Hospital Management System for Tata Medical Center (TMC),
Kolkata. TCS is providing 24x7 maintenance support services to TMC, Kolkata which includes enhancement to functions
of a comprehensive Hospital Management System (HMS) and the site IT Infrastructure. A 32TB NAS storage has been
added for non- HMS data archival by TMC medical staff. These activities are part of the IT Infrastructure services.
Currently a TCS sponsored Clinical Trial platform is being developed, which is expected to be in the production
environment this year. For ease of communication and tracking of information flow a SMS gateway has been
implemented at TMC. After a successful integration with the IP patient admission process the SMS gateway is now being
integrated with other process flows in phases.
In China, one out of approximately every 600 newborn babies suffers from cleftings. Often, these children have difficulty
in eating, speaking, hearing and/or breathing properly. Currently, it is estimated that there are 2.5 million children in
China suffering from cleftings. TCS associates have designed and implemented a comprehensive IT system for Operation
Smile China, which provides free surgeries to young patients with cleft palates.

Volunteering through TCS Maitree

A TCS volunteer helping children learn

50

The Company cultivates and propagates
volunteer-driven, meaningful activities for TCS
associates & their families in the domain of
associate engagement and community services.
TCS Maitree is a core human resources function
within TCS and is based on the philosophy of
Together, Caring and Sharing. TCS has grown
tenfold in the last decade with the workforce
scattered around the globe in innumerable
locations. The essence of TCS Maitree is to come
together; care and share in the spirit of friendship
within the TCS community, and then reach out
with the same spirit to the less privileged. During
the year 72,179 TCS associates volunteered
1,21,525 hours in CSR activities.

TCS is working to deploy a sustainable model to improve
education, healthcare and environment and promote
economic empowerment in rural areas across India. To
enhance their livelihood options in Panvel India, TCS
associates have trained 45 women in making ecofriendly jute bags through the 'Women Empowerment
Programme'.Students in the Science Lab at the Waze
school in PanvelIn this village more than 550 children
are benefitted through the provision of an infrastructure
for clean drinking water as well as supplementary
support in the learning of Conversational English,
Science and Mathematics.
Students in the Science Lab at the Waze school in Panvel

TCS launched Purpose4Life, in March 2013 enabling employees to commit
to social causes. It is aimed to provide a platform for scaling up efforts of
socially conscious associates in the areas of health, education, and
environment. Through Purpose4Life, every associate can pledge their social
contribution in terms of volunteering hours in three focus areas - Health,
Education and Environment. Associates can form teams and immediate family members can be included as well.

Disaster Relief Efforts in FY 15
This year, the Company and associates extended support to the relief efforts of Tata Relief Committee and the PM’s
Relief Fund in Jammu & Kashmir, Andhra Pradesh and Odisha. TCS donated an amount of INR 17.37 crores towards
these relief efforts.

51

Our Environment

Our Environment
As part of the TCS' mission to be a responsible corporate citizen, TCS continuously strives to reduce its ecological footprint by
decoupling the growth in business and the impact on the environment through conscious changes in its strategy across the
value chain and a beyond compliance approach. Senior management commitment and an integrated management system
approach under the aegis of the TCS' Environmental Policy form the basis of the strong focus on environmental sustainability.
99 TCS locations globally are certified for Environment Management System (EMS) under ISO 14001:2004 with an ongoing
commitment to bring additional and upcoming software development centers under scope of certification.
Green infrastructure, green IT, operational energy efficiency, and green power contribute towards reducing the specific energy
and carbon footprint. Water efficiency and closed loop recycling help to reduce the demand on fresh water and achieve water
neutrality. Effective waste management aligned to the 3R principle is enabling to achieve zero waste to landfill target at all TCS
campuses. Supply Chain Sustainability drive is to influence the supply chain partners to improve environmental performance
through engagement and gradual capacity building.
Resource efficiency

Beyond
compliance focus

Green building
infrastructure

Climate
Change
Mitigation

GreenIT

Green
Procurement

Employee
engagement

Supply Chain focus

Environment Management @ TCS
TCS' commitment to environment has helped it continue strongly on its environmental sustainability roadmap.
The performance for FY 2014-15 is summarized below –

Financial Year 2014-15 at a glance
Objective

Target Date

Carbon footprint* (per capita) reduction by 50%
over baseline 2007-08

2020

Status
On-track

2017

Include vendor sustainability requirements in
contract & conduct assessments

2017

ind
Beh
ind

Zero* solid waste disposal to landfill (*<5%)

Beh

2020

ed
ev

Water Neutrality

hi

2020

On-track

Ac

20% renewable energy procurement

ed
ev

2016

hi

Achieve PUE at 1.65 (weighted average)

Ac

*(Scope 1+Scope 2)

On-track
Beh

ed
ev
hi

ind

Ac
On-track

Beh

ed
ev
hi

ind

Ac
On-track

Beh

ed
ev
hi

ind

Ac
ed
ev

hi

Beh

Ac

ind

On-track

24] Compliance to all relevant environmental laws, acts, rules and guidelines is monitored on an ongoing basis. No instances of non-compliance to
environmental laws & regulations in FY 2015.
25] Water Neutrality shall be achieved through a combination of water conservation at source, treatment, recycling and reuse & rainwater harvesting to make good the
freshwater consumed either within TCS campuses or through community based watershed management projects to benefit the society and environment at large.
26] All performance over the baseline year 2007-08

54

Carbon & Energy
Commitment – To reduce the specific carbon footprint by 50% by 2020.
Energy in the form of electricity is a key resource for TCS which is essential for business operations It is also the single largest
contributor towards TCS' carbon footprint Figure 23 (a & b) TCS' carbon & energy management strategy recognizes the various
risks and opportunities of climate change and targets to mitigate the risks and simultaneously convert the opportunities to its'
advantage Energy management has been identified as a key opportunity and TCS has taken up the objective to reduce the
energy footprint through various measures like green building infrastructure green IT operational energy efficiency etc

42% reduction
in specific
Electricity
consumption

0.82 million tonnes of
CO2e & 1,328,993 Mwh
of electricity avoided

39% reduction
in specific
Carbon Footprint

2.4% of total
power from
renewable sources

7 LEED
certified
campuses

Achieved
PUE between
1.81 across
16 key
data centers

55% reduction
in business air
travel emissions

*Performance over the baseline year 2007-08

The sources of GHG emissions contributing to TCS's carbon footprint (Scope 1 & Scope 2) are:
Scope 1: Diesel operated Generator sets, Company-owned vehicles, Refrigerant gases (fugitive) emissions, cooking gas
combustion, fuel combustion for space heating
Scope 2: Purchased Electricity

4,50,000

4,23,777

Tonnes of CO2 equivalent

4,00,000

3,78,214

3,50,000

3,00,555

3,00,000
2,50,000
2,00,000
1,50,000
1,00,000

58,961

50,000

2012-13

44,375

34,263

2013-14

2014-15

Figure 23-a Carbon Footprint (Scope 1 & Scope 2) distribution

27] Being a services company, there is no direct raw material consumption in TCS' operations. Resources consumed including electricity, water, physical infrastructure and
office information & communication technology equipment are auxiliaries which support operations
28] Scope 1 and Scope 3 emissions have been calculated using the emissions factors published by the Green House Gas protocol. For Scope 2 emissions for India i.e.
purchased electricity related carbon emissions, the source is the emissions factor published by the CO2 Baseline Database for the Indian Power Sector, User Guide,
Version 10.0, December 2014 published by Central Electricity Authority of India. For Scope 2 emissions of overseas geographies emission factors published by DEFRA
have been referred.

55

50,000
45,000

43,967

40,000
35,000
30,000
25,000

24,653

20,000
15,270

15,796

15,000

14,581

11,247

10,000
2,817 2,842 3,172

5,000

259 385 507
STATIONARY
COMBUSTION
DIESEL GENERATORS

STATIONARY
COMBUSTION
COOKING GAS

2012-13

STATIONARY
COMBUSTION
SPACE HEATING

671 700 733
MOBILE
COMBUSTION
COMPANY OWNED
FLEET

2013-14

FUGITIVE
EMISSIONS
REFRIGRANT FROM
HVAC SYSTEM

2014-15

Figure 23-b: Scope 1 carbon footprint distribution

The primary source of electricity at TCS is grid electricity with diesel generator (DG) sets used for back-up power supply during
power outages. Some TCS offices have provision for roof-top solar and at some offices 'green power' is procured through open
access (hydroelectric power, wind power). Some overseas locations use fuel for space heating. A source-wise breakup of the
562,831 MWh (2,219,688 GJ) of electricity consumed by TCS in FY 2015 is given in Figure 24. The total direct energy consumption
by primary energy sources is 272,836 GJ (from fuel consumption in owned vehicles, diesel consumption in diesel generators,
combustion of cooking gas, space heating).

2.39%

3.92%

Electricity from Grid
Electricity from green sources

93.69%

Electricity from onsite fuel combustion

Figure 20: Electricity Consumption by Source (%)

TCS strives to manage its energy and carbon footprint focussing on four key levers – Green Buildings, Green IT, Operational
efficiency and renewable energy.

56

1
2

Green IT

1
4

Renewable
Energy

n

n

2
n
n

Green
Buildings

3
Eff icient

Energy efficiency by
design
Energy efficiency
equipment

n
n

3

n

n

Operations

4

n

n

Server virtualization
Server consolidation
Cooling optimization
Green procurement
Operational
efficiency
Remote energy
monitoring and
control
Onsite RE
installations, solar PV
& solar thermal
Procurement of RE
from third party

Energy & Carbon Management

Green Buildings
TCS views green infrastructure as a key tool for sustainable growth by reducing the ecological footprint of office spaces. All new
offices coming up are designed as per LEED Green Building standards for high energy and resource efficiency. TCS has 7 LEED
certified campuses at –
1. Siruseri Phase 1, Chennai - LEED Gold; Siruseri Phase 2, Chennai - LEED Platinum
2. Sahyadri Park, Pune - LEED Gold
3. Banyan Park, Mumbai - LEED Gold
4. Peepul Park, Trivandrum - LEED Silver
5. Kalinga Park, Bhubaneswar - LEED Platinum
6. Synergy Park (Phase 2), Hyderabad - LEED Gold
7. Garima Park, Ahmedabad - LEED Gold
The other upcoming facilities at Hyderabad, Kochi, Trivandrum and Indore are also designed as per green building standards.
Some of the new office spaces which TCS has leased are also LEED certified. Energy efficiency is a key criterion for new leases of
office spaces.

TCS Garima Park, Ahmedabad: LEED Gold Certified
Some key features of the TCS green buildings include energy efficient design of building envelope, energy efficient electrical and
mechanical equipment, onsite renewable energy (rooftop solar photovoltaic panels), solar thermal installations (hot water
generators), chiller waste heat recovery units, solar PV based peripheral lighting systems, etc.

57

TCS Sahyadri Park, Pune – LEED Gold Rated
TCS Sahyadri Park, located in Rajiv Gandhi Technology
Park (Hinjewadi, Pune), is designed to accommodate over
25,000 software professionals. The campus spans over an
area of 48 acres. The LEED Gold certified facility conserves
energy by promoting the maximum use of natural day
light, naturally ventilated open spaces, energy efficiency
utilities and lighting fixtures and use of solar energy
resources. Provision for sewage treatment and recycling
helps the campus become a zero water discharge site. The
campus also has an onsite bio-digester plant to treat the
bio-degradable waste generated at the site – towards the
zero waste to landfill target.

With the implementation of the Biodiversity Action Plan since the time of construction, Sahyadri Park, is now home to
rich biodiversity. A total of 210 trees were protected during construction period which were retained and were
incorporated into the final landscape design. 60% of the total land area is used for landscaping. The site has a rich
population of native species including Alstonia scholaris, Anthocephalus cadamba, Azadirachta indica, Bauhinia purpuria,
Cassia fistula, Cordia sebestena, Dillenia indica, Erythrina indica, Michelia champaca, Mimusops elengi, Saraca indica,
Terminalia catappa, etc. Biodiversity mapping of the campus through has been carried out and site specific Biodiversity
Action Plan has been implemented for conservation & enhancement of flora & fauna within the TCS premises for
protection of depleting urban biodiversity. Some of the programs include creation of butterfly zone, bird habitat
program, use of bio-fertilizer and protection of rare species - Khaya senegalensis (African Mahogany).

A View of Landscaping @ Sahyadri Park

Green IT
As a part of its Environmental Sustainability Roadmap, TCS has committed to improve data center power utilization efficiency
(PUE) by improving weighted average PUE of selected data-centers to 1.65 by March, 2016. This target was internally divided into
interim annual targets and the deployment of recommendations are being taken up in phases for effectiveness.
5 data-centers were taken up in the first year, and then 11 data-centers followed making it a total of 16 data-centers in FY14-15.
Deployment of best practices such as correct placement of supply grill tiles, arranging racks in hot and cold aisle, blocking of
cold air leakages and optimization of cooling units by switching off extra units were carried out to improve the PUE.
These recommendations incurred minimal cost and brought the weighted average PUE of the 16 data-centers to 1.81 from 2.16.
Online PUE dashboard is available for most data-centers on an internally developed tool that helps to monitor and track the PUE
performance.

Efficient Operations
TCS has embarked on a programme to actively monitor, manage and reduce the energy consumption of its facilities. In FY 201415, TCS invested in implementing energy monitoring infrastructure and an Energy Monitoring System, over 3 phases, which
covers over 100 facilities in India accounting for over 90% of overall energy consumption. This involved the installation of over
5,500 digital energy meters, and the associated hardware. This has enabled TCS to monitor, in real time, the energy consumption
of its facilities, at facility-level and/or at the load level.

58

This real-time oversight has helped to develop key performance indicators related to the energy performance of the sites,
identify the low hanging fruits to address energy wastages and identify facilities with opportunities for improvement where
operational and/or asset based interventions can be taken up. Active monitoring helps monitor the impact of the energy
efficiency initiatives being undertaken to ensure that they are achieving the expected savings and return on investment.
In 2015-16, the scope of this initiative will be increased across TCS' buildings portfolio, with further enhancements to the energy
management platform, so that TCS can actively measure energy consumption and track performance in relation to the
environmental targets, benchmarks and rating systems (eg. BEE star rating).

Renewable energy
The energy efficiency measures helps reduce the carbon footprint, but use of energy is inevitable for TCS' operations and hence
to further mitigate its climate impact, TCS has been keenly considering renewable energy as a substitute for high carbon energy.
In line with the aim of making a difference wherever possible, small renewable energy installations are installed across different
offices including solar peripheral lights, solar electrical fencing system, solar hot water generators, etc. At the campuses, roof-top
solar power plants are also installed to cater partly to the energy demand. Additionally, TCS is looking at procurement of
renewable energy through open access mechanism and targets to increase this capacity over the next few years to achieve a
target of 20% renewable component by 2020. In FY15 the total renewable energy component was 2.4% of the total energy
consumed.
At TCS, environmental initiatives are seen as part of the overall operational and infrastructure improvement and the expenditure
is not tracked separately. Green building projects are included in the capital expenditure while expenditures like monitoring
and measurement costs, small energy efficiency projects, compliance fees are included as a part of the operational budget for
the facility.
TCS has successfully reduced its specific carbon and energy footprint through appropriate mitigation measures clearly
demonstrating the decoupling of business growth and increase in absolute carbon and energy footprint. All these initiatives
have helped TCS reduce its energy consumption by 5% over FY 2014 and 42% over baseline year FY 2008 (25).

Electricity Consumption (kWh/FTE/month)
400

319

275

267

246

231

216

196

186

2008-09

2009-10

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

200
0
2007-08

Figure 25: Electricity Consumption (kWh/FTE/month)

The combined GHG emissions (Scope 1 + Scope 2) was 1.82 tCO2e/FTE/annum in FY 2015 as compared to 1.97
tCO2e/FTE/annum in the last financial year, 39% less than the baseline year 2008 and 8% less than the last reporting year (26).

4.00
3.00

Scope 1 + Scope 2 emissions (tCO2e/FTE/annum)
3.00

2.71

2.44

2.35

2.12

1.99

1.97

2.00

1.82

1.00
0.00

2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
Figure 26: Carbon Footprint (Scope 1 + Scope 2) in tCO2e/FTE/annum

59

Scope 3 carbon footprint
Scope 3 includes other indirect carbon emissions, which are a consequence of company's activities but occur from sources
not owned or controlled by the Company. Often this typically contributes significantly to the total carbon footprint for
any organization.
The Scope 3 accounting standard by the GHG Protocol classifies emission sources into pre-defined categories and the
accounting has to be done as per these categories. The various categories of Scope 3 emission sources applicable to TCS along
with the approach and reporting boundaries are described below:

Scope 3 Category

Accounting approach
Category 1 –
Purchased goods &
services

Category 2 –
Capital goods

Category 3 –
Fuel and energy related
activities (not included
in Scope 1 and Scope 2)

Category 4 –
Upstream
transportation
and distribution

Category 5 –
Waste generated
in operations

60

The carbon footprint from the information and communication
technology equipment purchased, which are not capitalized, is
accounted under purchased goods. The services which TCS
procures for infrastructure management are delivered from within
TCS premises and hence get accounted for in Scope 1 & Scope 2
emissions.

Emissions from oﬃce machinery, equipment, furniture, computer,
servers, electrical machinery which are capitalized are accounted
for in this category.

The emissions associated with upstream extraction, production
and transportation and T&D losses due to the electricity
consumed in TCS oﬃces are quantiﬁed under this category.

IT goods constitute a signiﬁcant % of the Company's overall
purchase. The upstream transportation and distribution emission
for the IT purchases have been quantiﬁed based on the Life Cycle
study published by key suppliers to TCS for diﬀerent IT assets like
desktop, laptop and servers.

Emissions associated with waste disposal have been quantified
taking into consideration the recycled quantities, waste treatment
and the disposal methods.

Business air travel is very relevant and material to TCS due to the
nature of business and operating model. TCS has been
monitoring the GHG emission from business air travel since the
baseline year on 2007-08 (Scope 3) and has been able to reduce
it by 55% over baseline year and is 0.36 tCO2e/FTE/annum. The
reduction has been possible due to the organization's
commitment to optimize the business air travel through strict
controls and by encouraging audio and video conferencing. The
year-on-year trend is given in Figure 27-b.

Category 6 Business travel

It has two components - travel by company provided hired vehicles
& travel in personal or public transport. The vehicle kilometers for
company provided hired vehicles is monitored by type of vehicle
and fuel and used to account for the associated emissions. For
employees commuting in personal or public transport, the number
of employees using personal transport (two wheeler or wheeler) is
collected from the parking pass issue records and the remaining are
assumed to travel by public transport. It was assumed that on an
average a person would travel 30 km in a day for work based on the
average distance of TCS offices in any city from the geographical
center. Emissions are accounted for based on the passenger
kilometer and the respective emission factor for passenger car,
motorbike, bus and train as different modes of transport. With India
geography as base to over 90% of associates, this data is reported
for the India geography only.

Category 7 Employee Commuting

The profile of the Scope 3 categories applicable to TCS is given below in Figure 27-a.
3.99%
11.50%

17.66%

Category 1 – Purchased goods & services, 25,037 tCO2e
Category 2 – Capital goods, 72,158 tCO2e
Category 3 – Fuel and energy related activities
(not included in Scope 1 or 2), 1,91,945 tCO2e

30.59%

35.64%

Category 4 – Upstream transportation
and distribution, 2,113 tCO2e
Category 5 – Waste generated in operations, 1,749 tCO2e
Category 7 – Employee commuting, 223,607, 35.64%
Category 6 – Business travel, 110,809, 17.66%

0.34%

0.28%

Figure 27-a: Scope 3 carbon footprint distribution

Business air travel emissions (TCO2e/FTE/annum)
1.00

0.80
0.44

0.50

0.52

0.44

0.42

0.34

0.31

0.36

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

0.00
2007-08

2008-09

2009-10

Figure 27-b: Carbon Footprint (Scope 3-Business Air Travel) in tCO2e/FTE/annum

30] Business air travel emissions are for all geographies and hence the FTE used is total FTE across all geographies.
31] Emission factors used are from DEFRA 2014 & DEFRA 2012 – GHG conversion factors, GHG Protocol All sector tools 2014, Lifecycle GHG assessment study published by key
suppliers of ICT equipment to TCS.

61

Ozone Depleting Substances
Some of the refrigerants like R-22 used in the HVAC systems have an Ozone Depleting Potential (ODP). All the ozone depleting
refrigerant gases as per the Montreal Protocol will be phased out and replaced with ODP free refrigerants in line with the
country-specific timelines agreed as per the Montreal Protocol and country regulations. The new facilities coming up at TCS have
HVAC systems based on non-ozone depleting refrigerants. ODS emissions reported are primarily in the form of system losses /
fugitive emissions during maintenance and repair. The ODP of the total refrigerant emissions to the atmosphere in FY 2015 was
0.28 tonnes.

Other Emissions
Emissions of SOx and NOx gases from the diesel generator sets (used as standby source of power during power outages) are as
given below:
Emissions

Quantity (tonnes)

Sox

3.3

NOx

410

Water Sustainability
Commitment – To achieve water neutrality by 2020
The pillars of TCS' water target are water efficiency by design in new offices/campuses, 100% treatment and recycling of sewage
and rainwater harvesting (within TCS premises and outside, as a part of CSR). Water neutrality, the ambitious goal which TCS has
set for itself, is an endorsement of the TATA Group's larger commitment to give back to the society.
Fresh water comes through various sources like municipality or the industrial development authority, water tankers, bore-wells,
and packaged drinking water (at some sites). The source-wise breakup of the 3.26 million kL of water consumed in FY 2015 is
given in Figure 28.

266,458 cum of rainwater
harvesting potential harvesting
potential created

13% reduction in specif ic
Water consumption
1.4 million kL of water usage avoided

4 million kL
of water recycled
*Performance over the baseline year 2007-08

Fresh water consumption by source

31,567 m3, 1%

10,88,871 m3, 33%

14,71,514 m3, 45%

Municipal
Borewell
Purchased (Tanker)
Bottled

6,66,862 m3, 21%

Figure 28: Freshwater consumption by source

32] No natural water source is directly impacted due to water consumption by TCS. For offices where measurement systems are not available, thumb-rule assumptions have
been used to estimate the quantity of water consumed/recycled/reused.

62

Water
efficiency

Treatment
and
recycling

Rainwater
harvesting

Awareness
creation

Water Management
Several water efficiency measures from design to awareness creation has helped reduce the specific fresh water consumption by
13% over baseline year FY 2008 (increased marginally over last year) (as shown in Figure 29). TCS has been able to maintain the
freshwater consumption levels despite the increase in campus based operations (large landscaped areas with higher water
requirement) due to efficient water management techniques.

Fresh water consumption (litres/FTE/month)
1,500

1,234

1,242

1,253

1,104

1,073

1,076

1,072

1,077

1,000
500
0

2007-08

2008-09 2009-10

2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14

2014-15

Figure 29: Fresh Water Consumption (liters/FTE/month)

Many TCS facilities have sewage treatment plants (STP). The treated effluent from the STP is tested regularly against applicable
effluent disposal standards and recycled for use in HVAC cooling tower make-up, toilet flushing and gardening. The recycled
treated sewage quantity has increased to 1,071,130 kL from 805,051 kL with the commissioning of new TCS green campuses
designed for zero water discharge (Figure 30).

Reused Water (kL)
15,00,000
10,71,130

8,05,051

10,00,000
5,00,000
0

2,68,901 3,06,652
1,40,612 2,34,701
2007-08

2008-09 2009-10

5,26,729 6,10,577

2010-11 2011-12

2012-13 2013-14 2014-15

Figure 30: Recycled water after treatment (kL)

63

The percentage of the total treated sewage recycled out of the total fresh water consumed has increased from 30% in FY 2014
to 34% in FY 2015. All upcoming new TCS facilities have STPs designed for 100% treatment and further recycling of the
treated effluent.
In order to achieve water sustainability various efforts are made & implemented by TCS in its owned and leased premises
wherever feasible. Rain water harvesting is an important feature of building design in the form of roof top collection system,
collection and storage tanks, recharging to bore wells, recharge trenches and pits, and in some cases, water bodies for storing
rain water.
There has been 23% increase in the rainwater harvesting potential created at TCS sites in FY 2015 over the previous year
(Figure 31) with the addition of two green field campuses. The current rainwater harvesting potential is 40% of the total
groundwater used across TCS facilities.

Rainwater Harvesting Potential (Cum)
2,66,458

3,00,000
2,17,396
2,00,000
1,00,000
0

54,745

59,358

2007-08

2008-09

87,602

96,741

2009-10

2010-11

1,35,430 1,48,769

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

Figure 31: Rainwater Harvesting Potential in cubic meter (cum)

Waste Management
Commitment – To achieve zero waste to landfill by 2017.
Being an IT services and consulting organization, there are no process wastes or significant primary wastes and emissions.
This section, discusses the various wastes generated in office-based operations and the steps taken to mitigate their impact.
The solid waste generation is fairly limited and restricted primarily to municipal solid waste (MSW). Electronic and electrical
waste (E-waste) and a small proportion of hazardous wastes like lead-acid batteries, waste lube oil, etc. is also generated,
which are regulated in many part of the world including India where there are specific regulations governing their handling
and disposal.

100% e-waste is
disposed through
government
authorized recyclers

100% hazardous
waste is disposed
through government
authorized recyclers

33] No significant impact on biodiversity of water bodies or related habitats by discharged water and runoff.

64

25%
biodegradable
waste
recycled on-site

100%
paper
waste
is recycled

Municipal solid waste today is a growing concern with limited landfill space available. It is one of the contributing factors for
global warming and climate change. TCS' waste management practices seek to reduce the environmental impact of waste
streams to the extent possible by reduction in generation, segregation at source, reuse and recycling where possible, and proper
management to achieve the ultimate goal (long-term target) of disposing less than 5% waste to landfill. For each category of
waste, the management practices are summarized below -

Disposed through
government authorized
recyclers in compliance
with local
regulations

Hazardous
& e-waste
Sent to
scrap
dealers or
municipal
disposal

Sent for
recycling

Paper
waste

Reduce
Reuse
Recycle

Mixed
dry
waste

Food
waste
Generation
of biogas/
compositing or sent
to piggeries as feed

Printer
& toner
cartridges

Sent back
to the
manufacturer
under
product
take-back
arrangement

Garden
waste

Vermi-compositing

Waste Management
TCS continuously strives to reduce the waste generation at source through rigorous associate awareness campaigns and training
cafeteria staff to reduce the waste generated ( Officer paper waste – 133 tonnes, Dry waste – 658 tonnes, canteen waste – 2831
tonnes) Figure 32.

Waste generated (Kg/FTE/annum)
30

19.9
20
10

14

14.7

2008-09

2009-10

16.9

18.2

17.7

15.2

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

8

0
2007-08

2010-11

Figure 32: Waste Generated (Kg/FTE/yr)

Environmentally Sustainable Biodegradable Waste management
TCS' sustainable waste roadmap emphasizes on the 3R principle to mitigate emissions and to achieve the goal of “zero waste to
landfill”. The first step to any waste management practice is waste segregation at source. The hierarchy for disposal of
biodegradable waste is biogas recovery through bio-digesters (methane avoidance) followed by composting, disposal as feed to
piggeries and, as the last resort, to the municipal waste collection system where no other options are available. The technology
selected depends upon the space availability and the estimated food waste generation. With a total capacity to treat over 13
tonnes of biodegradable waste per day within TCS offices, in FY 2015, 25% (861 tonnes treated out of 3410 tonnes of
biodegradable waste generated) of the total biodegradable waste generated was treated through onsite composting or biodigester treatment. A total of 60 tonnes of compost was generated from garden waste in FY 2015 which is used as fertilizer
within TCS' campuses. This is an excellent bio-fertilizer and helps avoid the use of chemical fertilizers thereby avoiding soil /
groundwater pollution and also maintains good health of the vegetation.

34] Data given is only for India geography since most overseas locations are multi-occupancy facilities where waste handling and disposal are handled by the building
authority and hence not under TCS' control

65

Achieving zero waste to landfill...

In line with the the TCS Corporate Environmental objective to become a zero waste to landfill organization,
two TCS UK Off ices, 33 Grosvenor Place, London and 1 Titheban street, Liverpool achieved accreditation of zero waste
to landfill. The accreditation was awarded by Valpak based on fulf ilment of following criteria n

Sending zero waste to landfill (including production, hazardous and packaging waste);

n

Sending limited amount of waste for Energy from Waste (EfW); and

n

Commitment to continual improvement - waste reduction and diversion

Paper management initiative
Though paper is not a material resource for TCS, it has focused on reducing paper consumption primarily since paper
manufacturing involves cutting trees and generates high levels of pollution. This would also help to reduce cost. Paper
management at TCS is based on the waste management hierarchy with waste reduction at the pinnacle. The success on paper
consumption reduction initiative is evident from the reduction achieved in the per capita paper consumption; 78% reduction
over the baseline (Figure 33).

Paper consumption (Reams/1000 FTE/month)
250
200
150
100
50
0

231
133
87

2007-08

2008-09

2009-10

72

65

55

51

50

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

Figure 33: Paper consumption (Reams/1000 FTE/month)

Much of this reduction can be attributed to migration of many paper-based processes to automated ones, reduced demand by
clients to provide multiple hard copies of documents and migration to soft copy formats rather than hard copies. However, a key
reduction has been achieved through creating awareness among associates and also enforcing printing discipline through
automated as well as manual means.
The paper waste which is generated is carefully segregated, shredded and sent for recycling. In some cases, they are sent to
NGOs which also supply stationery items (notepads, files, etc.) made from recycled paper back to TCS. In FY 2015, the recycling
initiative strengthened where 100% recycling of the total paper waste was achieved.

35] Data given is only for India geography since most overseas locations are multi-occupancy facilities where waste handling & disposal is handled by
the building authority

66

E-waste Management
The E-waste generated at the various TCS facilities includes defunct computers, monitors, servers, etc. and specified electronic
and electrical items. Management of E-waste is as per TCS' E-waste Management policy which complies with the WEEE directive
/ local regulations, various country regulations, including the Government of India's E-waste (Management and Handling) Rules,
2011. E-waste dismantlers and recyclers undergo a due-diligence audit process to verify their HSE legal compliances through a
desktop review and a site audit, thereby extending 'duty of care' to the supply chain.
In FY 2015, 15,550 numbers of waste computers were disposed-off through government authorized handlers / recyclers or as
per regulations applicable in each country. In addition, computers which were in working condition but deemed obsolete for
TCS's purposes were donated to educational and charitable institutions which have use for such equipment. Recipients of such
donations are required to return the hardware to TCS once it reaches end-of-life at their end or arrange for proper disposal
through government authorized E-waste vendors. TCS offers to facilitate this disposal through the authorized channels.

Hazardous Waste Management
For India operations hazardous wastes (as defined by regulations) are handled and disposed of as per the Hazardous Waste
Handling and Management Rules, 2008, only through government authorized vendors. TCS conducts compliance and site
audits before registering hazardous waste vendors as a part of its supply chain sustainability drive. Similarly, appropriate local
regulations are followed in other geographies where applicable. However, due to the relatively small proportion of TCSoperated facilities in overseas geographies (which are mostly leased and operated by building owners), the generation of such
wastes is rather marginal and is appropriately handled through the building operators.
Hazardous Wastes Disposed

FY 2015

Lube oil from DG sets (litres)

16,001

Used batteries from UPS systems (nos.)

5,022

Additionally, all the used printer cartridges and photocopier toner bottles are sent back to the manufacturer under product take
back arrangement to ensure proper disposal.

Employee Engagement
Employee engagement is a key pillar for success of TCS' Environmental Sustainability Roadmap. It is important for TCS to engage
its associates and sensitize them towards nature and conserving its various resources. The training methodologies used range
from induction training to continuous learning to awareness mailers to various campaigns and competitions on environment.
The total training man-hours imparted this year on health, safety and environment was over 3,90,000. In FY15, TCS observed the
TATA Sustainability Month in June. Some of the other days observed include World Earth Day, World Bio-diversity Day, Green
Consumer Day, Pollution Control Day, Energy Conservation Day, World Water Day, Earth hour campaign. Each event sees an
overwhelming participation from associates.
TATA Sustainability Month, June 2014
Sustainability is the core to business philosophy of the Tata Group. As a part of the group’s commitment towards society
and environment, TCS celebrated a month long environmental sustainability campaign from 2nd-30th June, 2014.
The underlining theme of the campaign was, S.M.A.R.T., Sustainable and Meaningful Actions for a Responsible Tata way. It
was observed through the weekly themes Carbon and Energy, Water, Waste and Biodiversity, as the key pillars of
sustainability.
Various activities that were conducted included inauguration of various green initiatives, informative lectures by experts,
tree plantation drives, exhibitions, floor walks, movie screening and competitions for associates and contract staff. Several
innovative and engaging contests were conducted this time such as Green Selfie Contest, Green Crusader Contest and
Green ODC Contest.

36] Data for all geographies.
37] There were no reported spills of hazardous wastes in FY 2015. Zero percent of wastes are shipped internationally and none are deemed hazardous under the terms of
the Basel Convention Annex I, II, III, and VIII.
38] Data only for India geography.

67

Manure distribution at Army school and to farmers @ TCS Lucknow

Energy

SAS Hill Volunteering at TCS Hungary

Water

Tree plantation drive @ TCS Bangalore and Kolkata

Session at a local school at Trivendrum

TATA Sustainability Month 2014

Skit on environment theme at
TCS Bangalore

Facility green tour at TCS Mumbai

Waste

E-waste collection centre at TCS Bangalore

68

Floorwalk @ Bangalore

Biodiversity

Solar energy products display
at TCS Delhi

Rainwater harvesting demonstration
at TCS Bangalore

TSM 2014... Beyond our offices...
TCS donated naturally regenerated saplings of native
trees like Ficus glomerata (Wild Fig), Ficus religiosa
(Peepul Tree), Ficus bengolensis (Banyan Tree), Mangifera
indica (Mango), Terminalia catappa (Wild almond),
Syzygium cumunii (Jamun), Polyalthia acuminota
(Asoka), which were cultured in the nursery of TCS'
Yantra Park Campus to an NGO Hariyali. The NGO used
the saplings for rejuvenation of degraded forest land at
Bhavale in Thane district, Maharashtra to enhance the
ecosystem and native biodiversity.

On the occasion of the World Environment
Week, 2014, TCS was invited to showcase the
biodiversity initiatives it has Implemented in its
Yantra Park Campus to public at the Thane
Municipal Corporation Green Idea Exhibition.
TCS showcased its energy conservation
programs, sustainability waste management
programs, rainwater harvesting and biodiversity
conservation initiatives including bird habitat
program, butterfly zones, care for nature,
protection of nature and endangered species,
etc. The event saw a foot-fall of over 50,000
people over a course of 4 days and was well
appreciated by the off icials as well as citizens.

Energy War & More @ TCS UK
TCS UK HSE & Maitree worked together to bring to life
the Energy War & More environmental campaign in
FY15. This was endorsed by the country head, who
launched the campaign by asking employees to
follow his example of pledging to support energy,
waste and travel reduction initiatives.
In line with the war theme, life size versions of "Major
Impact" were on guard at ODC's across the UK and
used as notice boards to display weekly information
on activities and competitions. Each ODC had a
squadron of soldiers to assist with onsite activities
which included switch off week, black out hour, no
print day, no waste lunch, bin battles and a
travel survey.
An energy bike was taken to all DOC's and its facilitators were dressed as soldiers. The objective was to raise
awareness of how much energy was needed to power electrical items by getting employees to pedal the
equivalent amount of energy.

69

Biodiversity Conservation and Enhancement
Community Based Afforestation Program: Balancing Environment & Livelihood @ Tamil Nadu, India
TCS sponsored a community based afforestation program with a Chennai based NGO in Kanchipuram district of Tamil
Nadu. Community based afforestation programs are more sustainable as they are inclusive and contribute to livelihood
security of the farmers. The program involved identification of degraded farmland, coordination with gram-panchayats,
local officials and farmers, formation of small groups, field visits, awareness creation on importance of teak wood
plantation and monitoring. Teakwood is a drought resistant commercial timber crop. Hence it was selected to restore the
degraded farmlands. 26 acres of degraded farmland, belonging to 10 subsistence farmers, was identified for the program.

A view of degraded agricultural land identified for plantation and
TCS-TIST team with subsistent farmers at village in Kanchipuram district
The Inaugural Plantation Ceremony was conducted with active participation from associates through TCS-Maitree &
Ecology Club of TCS Chennai on 28th June 2014 at Marianallur village, Thiruvannamalai District, Tamil Nadu. Total 907
saplings of teakwood (Tectona grandis) were planted by associates.

Associates participation in the inaugural plantation ceremony at project site
Environmental benefits of the program –
1. Conversion of 26 acres of degraded agricultural land into productive land
2. 10,000 teakwood Trees planted on degraded farmland
3. Over 20 years the land will be converted into productive agricultural land
4. Plantation of trees will restore ecosystem services such as soil erosion, water retention, habitats for
flora & fauna species to enhance biodiversity
5. Serve as a carbon sink

Social benefits of the program –
1. 10 families of subsistence farmers benefited
2. Implementation of Incentive Program for farmers: Rs. 2/Tree/Year for ensuring successful survival of plantation
3. Source of fuel wood generation
4. Income generation from sale of teakwood after maturation period of 20 years
5. Feasibility of intercrops for additional source of income

70

Feedback from the benef iciaries

We are happy that we got good
quality free teak seedlings,
which is valuable timber tree species

As teak trees are good
timber tree species &
will be a good legacy for our future

Through this program
we are saving our
land in good condition

Update on the Marine turtle conservation program 2014
TCS continued to support the marine turtle conservation program along six coastal
villages of Maharashtra. A total of 21 turtles nests were protected, 2210 eggs were
translocated to hatchery and 1303 hatchlings released into the sea in 2014. A very
encouraging survival rate of 58.95% was achieved thus, contributing towards protecting
the engendered marine turtle population worldwide.

Appendix A
While TCS has presence in several geographies across the world, more than 90% of the associates are based out of India
geography. TCS is building capacity to report the environmental performance of all overseas delivery centers and intend to
increase the scope of reporting in a phased manner. This year, the environmental performance has been reported for three
major overseas geographies (from 27 offices across 9 countries – Brazil, UK, Hungary, China, Philippines, Chile, Singapore,
Uruguay and Mexico).
Geography-wise environment performance for FY 2015
India

Europe
& UK

Latin
America

Asia Pacific

Electricity consumption
(kWh/FTE/month)

188

212

150

121

Carbon Footprint (Scope 1 + Scope 2)
(tCO2e/FTE/annum)

1.88

0.60

0.57

0.90

Water consumption
(L/FTE/month)

1112

551

458

436

KPI

39] In the overseas geographies, most of the locations are small sales offices with very less employee strength. A major proportion of associates are based out of client
locations. Hence, the scope of reporting covers only on the larger delivery centers with significant TCS presence.
40] Delivery centers across India, Europe (UK, Hungary), Asia Pacific (China, Philippines, Singapore), Latam (Uruguay, Chile, Mexico, Brazil)

71

Supply Chain Sustainability
Commitment – To include vendor sustainability requirements in contract &
conduct assessments

Supply Chain Sustainability
As part of its Environmental Sustainability Roadmap, TCS continues to engage its supply chain partners to encourage them to
conduct their business in socially and environmentally responsible manner. Engagement and capacity building are the pillars of
the Sustainable Supply Chain program at TCS.

Sustainable Supply Chain
Engagement Model

1

Evaluate the
vendor/product portfolio
Map the active
vendor/product portfolio

6

Assessment
Based on the vendor risk
level and engagement
requirement, conduct
assessment ranging
from desktop to regular
site audits.

5

Evaluate the current
product/vendor portfolio

2

Prioritize
Based upon the volume of business and
applicability of legal requirements,
conduct a preliminary prioritization
to identify the major
purchases/vendors.
Prioritize
them based
on volume &
legal requirement

Vendor
assessment
and audits

Engage
Based on the risk level
assigned in Step 4, draw
the vendor engagement
plan at all stages from
release of tender till
on-boarding

Vendor
engagement
at the time
of contract

Access the
Environmental,
Social and
Safety risks

3

Conduct risk
assessment
Conduct the risk
assessment for
environmental, social and
safety risks for each vendor
and product categories.

Evaluate the
overall vendor
risk level and
impact type

4

Assign overall risk level and
Impact Type
Prioritize based on the overall risk
level assigned to the vendor as an
outcome to step 3. Also ascertain
where impact on TCS is directed
or indirect

TCS conducted annual vendor HSE meet at TCS-Yantra Park, Mumbai where all key vendors were invited to participate. This
forum served as a platform for TCS to reinforce the Sustainability expectations it has from its supply chain partners and also gave
an opportunity for the vendors to raise their questions and concerns. The Sustainability requirements in the form of the TCS'
Supplier Code of Conduct, Contractor HSE requirements are an integral part of vendor contracts and all vendors must sign-off
and agree to abide by these requirements as a part of the engagement with TCS.
In FY15, over 80% of vendor contracts (approx. 180) were reviewed for inclusion of HSE / Sustainability requirements. Desktop
assessment have been conducted for some vendors where the impact on TCS is indirect including ICT suppliers and site/process
audits/reviews have been conducted for high risk vendors with direct impact on TCS like hazardous and e-waste recyclers,
canteen, facility management and transport service providers.

72

GRI Index

1. Strategy and Analysis

Profile
Disclosure
1.1

1.2

Disclosure
Statement from the most senior
decision-maker of the
organization.
Description of key impacts, risks,
and opportunities.

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

Fully

CEO's message page 5

Fully

Sustainability
of Business
Performance - page 24
Definition of content page 15

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not
reported

Reason for
omission

Explanation for the
reason for omission

Reason for
omission

Explanation for the
reason for omission

2. Organizational Profile

Profile
Disclosure

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

2.1

Name of the organization.

Fully

Organizational profile page 8

2.2

Primary brands, products,
and/or services.

Fully

Organizational profile page 8

2.3

Operational structure of the
organization, including main
divisions, operating companies,
subsidiaries, and joint ventures.

Fully

Structured for Agility page 27
Business overview page 8

2.4

Location of organization's
headquarters.

Fully

Contacts - page 92

2.5

Number of countries where the
organization operates, and
names of countries with either
major operations or that are
specifically relevant to the
sustainability issues covered in
the report.

Fully

Global Footprint page 9

2.6

Nature of ownership and legal
form.

Fully

Organizational profile page 8

2.7

Markets served (including
geographic breakdown, sectors
served, and types of
customers/beneficiaries).

Fully

Global Footprint page 9

2.8

Scale of the reporting
organization.

Fully

TCS by numbers page 9

2.9

Significant changes during the
reporting period regarding size,
structure, or ownership.

Fully

Organizational profile page 8

2.10

Awards received in the reporting
Fully
period.

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not
reported

Awards - page 11

73

3. Report Parameters

Proﬁle
Disclosure

3.1

3.2

Reporting period (e.g.,
ﬁscal/calendar year) for
information provided.
Date of most recent previous
report (if any).

Fully

Fully

Location of disclosure
About the report page 2

About the report page 4

3.3

Reporting cycle (annual,
biennial, etc.).

Fully

About the report page 4

3.4

Contact point for questions
regarding the report or
its contents.

Fully

Contacts page 92

3.5

Process for deﬁning report
content.

Fully

Definition of Content page 15

3.6

3.7

74

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Boundary of the report (e.g.,
countries, divisions,
subsidiaries, leased facilities,
joint ventures, suppliers). See
GRI Boundary Protocol for
further guidance.
State any speciﬁc limitations on
the scope or boundary of the
report (see completeness
principle for explanation of
scope).

Fully

Fully

About the report page 4

About the report page 4

3.8

Basis for reporting on joint
ventures, subsidiaries, leased
facilities, outsourced
operations, and other entities
that can signiﬁcantly aﬀect
comparability from period to
period and/or between
organizations.

Fully

About the report page 4

3.9

Data measurement techniques
and the bases of calculations,
including assumptions and
techniques underlying
estimations applied to the
compilation of the Indicators
and other information in the
report. Explain any decisions
not to apply, or to substantially
diverge from, the GRI Indicator
Protocols.

Fully

About the report page 4

3.10

Explanation of the eﬀect of any
re-statements of information
provided in earlier reports, and
the reasons for such restatement (e.g.,
mergers/acquisitions, change
of base years/periods, nature of
business, measurement
methods).

Fully

About the report page 4

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not
reported

Reason
for
omission

Explanation for the
reason for omission

Profile
Disclosure

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

3.11

Significant changes from
previous reporting periods in
the scope, boundary, or
measurement methods applied
in the report.

Fully

About the report page 4

3.12

Table identifying the location
of the Standard Disclosures in
the report.

Fully

GRI Index - page 73

3.13

Policy and current practice
with regard to seeking external
assurance for the report.

Fully

About the report page 4

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not
reported

Reason
for
omission

Explanation for the
reason for omission

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not
reported

Reason
for
omission

Explanation for the
reason for omission

4. Governance, Commitments, and Engagement

Profile
Disclosure

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

4.1

Governance structure of the
organization, including
committees under the highest
governance body responsible
for specific tasks, such as
setting strategy or
organizational oversight.

Fully

Corporate Governance
- page 18

4.2

Indicate whether the Chair of
the highest governance body is
also an executive officer.

Fully

Avoidance of Conflict
of interest - pages 19

4.3

For organizations that have a
unitary board structure, state
the number and gender of
members of the highest
governance body that are
independent and/or
non-executive members.

Fully

Corporate Governance
- page 18

4.4

Mechanisms for shareholders
and employees to provide
recommendations or
direction to the highest
governance body.

Fully

Corporate Governance
- page 18
Our Workforce
- page 33

4.5

Linkage between
compensation for members of
the highest governance body,
senior managers, and
executives (including
departure arrangements), and
the organization's performance
(including social and
environmental performance).

Fully

Corporate Governance
- page 18

4.6

Processes in place for the
highest governance body to
ensure conflicts of interest
are avoided.

Fully

Avoidance of Conflict
of interest - pages 19

75

G3.1 DMAs Disclosure

76

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

4.7

Process for determining the
composition, qualiﬁcations, and
expertise of the members of the
highest governance body and its Fully
committees, including any
consideration of gender and
other indicators of diversity.

Corporate Governance page 18

4.8

Internally developed statements
of mission or values, codes of
conduct, and principles relevant
Fully
to economic, environmental, and
social performance and the
status of their implementation.

Mission and Values page 8

4.9

Procedures of the highest
governance body for overseeing
the organization's identiﬁcation
and management of economic,
environmental, and social
Fully
performance, including relevant
risks and opportunities, and
adherence or compliance with
internationally agreed standards,
codes of conduct, and principles.

Board Oversight of the
Sustainability Agenda pages 20

4.10

Processes for evaluating the
highest governance body's own
performance, particularly with
respect to economic,
environmental, and social
performance.

Fully

Corporate Governance page 18

4.11

Explanation of whether and how
the precautionary approach or
Fully
principle is addressed by the
organization.

Our Environment
UNGC Principle 7 - page
54

4.12

Externally developed economic,
environmental, and social
charters, principles, or other
initiatives to which the
organization subscribes or
endorses.

Corporate Governance page 18

4.13

Memberships in associations
(such as industry associations)
and/or national/international
advocacy organizations in which
the organization: *
Has positions in governance
Fully
bodies; * Participates in projects
or committees;
* Provides substantive funding
beyond routine membership
dues; or * Views membership
as strategic.

Stakeholder Engagement
- page 13

4.17

Key topics and concerns that
have been raised through
stakeholder engagement, and
how the organization has
Fully
responded to those key topics
and concerns, including through
its reporting.

Definition of Content
- page 15

Fully

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not
reported

Reason for
omission

Explanation for the reason
for omission

G3.1
DMAs

Level of
reporting

Disclosure

Location of disclosure

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not
reported

Reason
for
omission

Explanation for the
reason for omission

STANDARD DISCLOSURES PART II: Disclosures on Management Approach (DMAs)
DMA EC

Disclosure on Management Approach EC

Aspects
Economic performance

Fully

TCS by numbers page 10
Competitive
compensation model
- page 37

Market presence

Fully

Local Recruitment
outside India - page 35
Local subcontractors
- page 35

Fully

Direct and Indirect
economic impact
- page 44
Corporate Social
Responsibility page 45

Indirect economic impacts

DMA EN

Disclosure on Management Approach EN

Aspects

Materials

Fully

Paper Management
Initiative - page 66

Energy

Fully

Carbon & energy
- page 55

Water

Fully

Water Sustainability
- page 62

Biodiversity

Fully

Biodiversity
Conservation and
Enhancement
- page 70

Emissions, effluents and waste

Fully

Waste management
- page 64

Products and services

Fully

Sustainability in
Marketing
- pages 29

Compliance

Fully

Ethics and Compliance
- page 21

Transport

Fully

GHG Emissions
(Carbon Footprint) pages 60-61

77

G3.1
DMAs

DMA LA

Aspects

78

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Overall

Fully

Location of disclosure
Our Environment
- page 54

Disclosure on Management Approach LA

Fully

Diversifying the Talent
Pool - page 33
Talent Retention
- pages 36

Labor/management relations

Fully

Competitive
Compensation Model
- page 37
Our Workforce
- page 33

Occupational health and safety

Fully

Occupational Health
and Safety - page 40

Training and education

Fully

Learning &
Development
- page 35

Diversity and equal
opportunity

Fully

Diversifying the talent
pool - page 33
Our Workforce
- page 33

Equal remuneration for women
and men

Fully

Competitive
Compensation Model
- page 37

Employment

DMA HR

Disclosure on Management Approach HR

Aspects

Investment and procurement
practices

Fully

Commitment to
Human Rights
- page 38

Non-discrimination

Fully

Commitment to
Human Rights
- page 38

Freedom of association and
collective bargaining

Fully

Our Workforce
- page 33

Child labor

Fully

Commitment to
Human Rights
- pages 38

Prevention of forced and
compulsory labor

Fully

Commitment to
Human Rights
- pages 38

Security practices

Fully

Commitment to
Human Rights
- pages 38

Indigenous rights

Fully

Commitment to
Human Rights
- pages 38

Assessment

Fully

Commitment to
Human Rights
- pages 38

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not
reported

Reason
for
omission

Explanation for the
reason for omission

Level of
reporting

G3.1 DMAs

Disclosure

DMA SO

Disclosure on Management Approach SO

Aspects

Location of disclosure

Local communities

Fully

Corporate Social
Responsibility
- page 45
Direct and Indirect
Economic Impact
- page 44

Corruption

Fully

Serving as an Ethical
Exemplar - page 23

Public policy

Fully

Apolitical Stance
- page 14

Anti-competitive behavior

Fully

Ethics and Compliance
- page 21

Compliance

Fully

Ethics and Compliance
- page 21

DMA PR

Disclosure on Management Approach PR

Aspects

Customer health and safety

Fully

Brand Building
- pages 28

Product and service labelling

Fully

Brand Building
- pages 28

Marketing communications

Fully

Brand Building
- pages 28

Customer privacy

Fully

Information Security
and Data Privacy
- page 26

Compliance

Fully

Ethics and Compliance
- page 21

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not
reported

Reason
for
omission

Explanation for the
reason of omission

Reason
for
omission

To be reported in

STANDARD DISCLOSURES PART III: Performance Indicators
Economic

Indicator

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not
reported

Economic performance

EC1

Direct economic value
generated and distributed,
including revenues, operating
costs, employee
compensation, donations and
other community investments,
retained earnings, and
payments to capital providers
and governments.

Fully

TCS by numbers
- page 10
Competitive
compensation model
- page 37

Ec2

Financial implications and
other risks and opportunities
for the organization's activities
due to climate change.

Fully

Our Environment
UNGC Principle 7
- page 54

79

Level of
reporting

G3.1 DMAs

Disclosure

Location of disclosure

Ec3

Coverage of the organization's
defined benefit plan
obligations.

Fully

Competitive
compensation model
- pages 37

EC4

Significant financial assistance
received from government.

Fully

Financial Sustainability page 30

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not
reported

Reason for
omission

Explanation for the
reason of omission

For partially
reported
disclosures,

Reason for
omission

To be reported in

Market presence

Ec5

Range of ratios of standard
entry level wage by gender
compared to local minimum
wage at significant locations
of operation.

Fully

Competitive
compensation model
- page 37

EC6

Policy, practices, and proportion
of spending
on locally-based suppliers
Fully
at significant locations
of operation.

Local subcontractors
- page 35
Our Workforce
- page 33

EC7

Procedures for local hiring and
proportion of senior
management hired from the
local community at significant
locations of operation.

Fully

Local Recruitment
outside India
UNGC Principle 6
- page 35

EC8

Development and impact of
infrastructure investments and
services provided primarily for
public benefit through
commercial, in-kind, or pro
bono engagement.

Fully

Corporate Social
Responsibility
- page 45

EC9

Understanding and describing
significant indirect economic
impacts, including the extent of
impacts.

Fully

Direct and Indirect
economic impact
- page 44

Indirect economic impacts

Environmental

Indicator

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

Materials

En1

Materials used by weight or
volume.

Fully

Carbon & energy
UNGC Principle 7 & 8
- page 55

EN2

Percentage of materials used
that are recycled input
materials.

Fully

Paper Management
Initiative
UNGC Principle 8 & 9
- page 66

EN3

Direct energy consumption by
primary energy source.

Fully

Carbon & energy
UNGC Principle 7 & 8
- page 55

EN4

Indirect energy consumption by
Fully
primary source.

Carbon & energy
UNGC Principle 7 & 8
- page 55

Energy

80

G3.1 DMAs

Disclosure

En5

Energy saved due to
conservation and efficiency
improvements.

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

Fully

Green Buildings
UNGC Principle 7 & 8
- page 57

EN6

Initiatives to provide energyefficient or renewable energy
based products and services,
and reductions in energy
requirements as a result of
these initiatives.

Fully

Our Sustainability
Services - page 30
Carbon & energy
UNGC Principle 7 & 8
- page 55

EN7

Initiatives to reduce indirect
energy consumption and
reductions achieved.

Fully

Carbon & energy
UNGC Principle 7 & 8
- page 55

EN8

Total water withdrawal
by source.

Fully

Water Sustainability
- page 62

EN9

Water sources significantly
affected by withdrawal
of water.

Fully

Water Sustainability
- page 62

EN10

Percentage and total volume of
water recycled and reused.

Fully

Sewage Treatment
and Reuse
UNGC Principle 7 & 8
- page 58

EN11

Location and size of land
owned, leased, managed in, or
adjacent to, protected areas and Fully
areas of high biodiversity value
outside protected areas.

Biodiversity
Conservation and
Enhancement
UNGC Principle 7 & 8
- page 70

EN12

Description of significant
impacts of activities, products,
and services on biodiversity in
protected areas and areas of
high biodiversity value outside
protected areas.

Fully

Biodiversity
Conservation and
Enhancement
UNGC Principle 7 & 8
- page 70

Fully

Biodiversity
Conservation and
Enhancement
UNGC Principle 7 & 8
- page 70

Fully

Biodiversity
Conservation and
Enhancement
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 page 70

Fully

Biodiversity
Conservation and
Enhancement
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 page 70

Fully

GHG Emissions
(Carbon Footprint)
- pages 60-61

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not
reported

Reason for
omission

Explanation for the
reason of omission

Water

Biodiversity

EN13

Habitats protected or restored.

EN14

Strategies, current actions, and
future plans for managing
impacts on biodiversity.

EN15

Number of IUCN Red List
species and national
conservation list species with
habitats in areas affected by
operations, by level of
extinction risk.

Emissions, effluents and waste

EN16

Total direct and indirect
greenhouse gas emissions by
weight.

81

G3.1 DMAs

Disclosure

En17

Other relevant indirect
greenhouse gas emissions by
weight.

Level of
reporting

Fully

Location of disclosure

GHG Emissions (Carbon
Footprint)
- pages 60-61

En19

Emissions of ozone-depleting
substances by weight.

Fully

Ozone depleting
substances
UNGC Principle 7 & 8
- page 62

EN20

NOx, SOx, and other significant
air emissions by type and
weight.

Fully

Other emissions
UNGC Principle 7 & 8
- page 62

EN21

Total water discharge by quality
and destination.

Partially

Sewage Treatment
and Reuse
UNGC Principle 7 & 8
- pages 58

EN22

Total weight of waste by type
and disposal method.

Fully

Waste Management
UNGC Principle 7 & 8
- page 64

EN23

Total number and volume of
significant spills.

Fully

Hazardous Waste
Management
- page 67

EN24

Weight of transported,
imported, exported, or treated
waste deemed hazardous under
the terms of the Basel
Fully
Convention Annex I, II, III, and
VIII, and percentage of
transported waste shipped
internationally.

EN25

Identity, size, protected status,
and biodiversity value of water
bodies and related habitats
significantly affected by the
reporting organization's
discharges of water and runoff.

Fully

Hazardous Waste
Management - page 67

Sewage Treatment and
Reuse
UNGC Principle 7 & 8
- page 58

Products and services

EN26

Initiatives to mitigate
environmental impacts of
products and services, and
extent of impact mitigation.

Fully

Sustainability in
Marketing
UNGC Principle 8 & 9
- pages 29

EN27

Percentage of products sold
and their packaging materials
that are reclaimed by category.

Fully

Sustainability in
Marketing
UNGC Principle 8 & 9
- page 29

Monetary value of significant
fines and total number of nonmonetary sanctions for noncompliance with environmental
laws and regulations.

Fully

Our Environment
UNGC Principle 7
- page 54

Compliance

EN28

82

Reason for
omission

Explanation for the
reason of omission

Not
available

2017

Scope 3 carbon
footprint
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 page 60

Initiatives to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions and reductions
achieved.
Fully

EN18

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not
reported

Water
Discharge
Quantity

G3.1 DMAs

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not
reported

Reason for
omission

Explanation for the
reason of omission

Reason for
omission

To be reported in

Transport

EN29

Significant environmental
impacts of transporting
products and other goods and
materials used for the
organization's operations, and
transporting members of the
workforce.

Fully

GHG Emissions
(Carbon Footprint)
UNGC Principle 7 & 8
- page 60-61

Total environmental protection
expenditures and investments
by type.

Fully

Our Environment
UNGC Principle 7
- page 54

Overall

EN30

Social: Labor Practices and Decent Work

Indicator

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not
reported

Employment

La1

Total workforce by employment
type, employment contract,
and region, broken down
by gender.

Fully

Our Workforce
- pages 33

LA2

Total number and rate of new
employee hires and employee
turnover by age group, gender,
and region.

Fully

Talent acquisition
UNGC Principle 6
- page 33

LA3

Benefits provided to full-time
employees that are not
provided to temporary or parttime employees, by major
operations.

Fully

Competitive
Compensation Model
- page 37

LA15

Return to work and retention
rates after parental leave, by
gender.

Fully

Talent retention
- pages 36

Labor/management relations
LA4

Percentage of employees
covered by collective
bargaining agreements.

Fully

Our Workforce
- page 33

LA5

Minimum notice period(s)
regarding significant
operational changes, including
whether it is specified in
collective agreements.

Fully

Our Workforce
UNGC Principle 3
- page 33

Fully

Occupational Health
and Safety
UNGC Principle 1 - page
40

Occupational health and safety

LA6

Percentage of total workforce
represented in formal joint
management-worker health
and safety committees that
help monitor and advise on
occupational health and
safety programs.

83

Level of
reporting

G3.1 DMAs

Disclosure

Location of disclosure

La7

Rates of injury, occupational
diseases, lost days, and
absenteeism, and number of
work-related fatalities by
region and by gender.

Partially

Injury Data
UNGC Principle 1
- page 43

LA8

Education, training,
counseling, prevention, and
risk-control programs in place
to assist workforce members,
their families, or community
members regarding serious
diseases.

Fully

Occupational Health
and Safety
UNGC Principle 1
- page 40

LA9

Health and safety topics
covered in formal agreements
with trade unions.

Fully

Occupational Health
and Safety
UNGC Principle 1
- page 40

Training and education

LA10

Average hours of training per
year per employee by gender,
and by employee category.

Fully

Learning &
Development
- page 35

LA11

Programs for skills
management and lifelong
learning that support the
continued employability of
employees and assist them in
managing career endings.

Fully

Learning &
Development
- page 35

LA12

Percentage of employees
receiving regular performance
and career development
reviews, by gender.

Fully

Career Development
- page 37

Fully

Corporate Governance
- page 17
Diversifying the
talent pool
UNGC Principle 6
- page 39

Fully

Competitive
Compensation Model
- page 37

Diversity and equal opportunity

LA13

Composition of governance
bodies and breakdown of
employees per employee
category according to gender,
age group, minority group
membership, and other
indicators of diversity.

Equal remuneration for women and men

LA14

84

Ratio of basic salary and
remuneration of women to
men by employee category,
by significant locations
of operation.

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not
reported

Reason for
omission

Explanation for the
reason of omission

Lost work
days

Not
available

2016

Social: Human Rights

Indicator

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

For partially
reported
disclosures,

Reason
for
omission

To be reported in

Investment and procurement practices

HR1

Percentage and total number
of significant investment
agreements and contracts that
include clauses incorporating
human rights concerns, or that
have undergone human rights
screening.

HR2

Percentage of significant
suppliers, contractors and
other business partners that
have undergone human rights
screening, and actions taken.

HR3

Total hours of employee
training on policies and
procedures concerning
aspects of human rights that
are relevant to operations,
including the percentage of
employees trained.

Fully

Commitment to
Human Rights
UNGC Principles 1-6
- page 38

Fully

Commitment to
Human Rights
UNGC Principles 1-6
- page 38

Fully

Commitment to
Human Rights
UNGC Principles 1-6
- page 38

Fully

Commitment to
Human Rights
UNGC Principles 1-6
- pages 38

Non-discrimination

HR4

Total number of incidents of
discrimination and corrective
actions taken.

Freedom of association and collective bargaining

HR5

Operations and significant
suppliers identified in which
the right to exercise freedom
of association and collective
bargaining may be violated or
at significant risk, and actions
taken to support these rights.

Fully

Commitment to
Human Rights
UNGC Principles 1-6
- pages 38

Operations and significant
suppliers identified as having
significant risk for incidents
of child labor, and measures
taken to contribute to
the effective abolition of
child labor.

Fully

Commitment to
Human Rights
UNGC Principles 1-6
- page 38

Fully

Commitment to
Human Rights
UNGC Principles 1-6
- page 38

Child labor

HR6

Prevention of forced and compulsory labor

Hr7

Operations and significant
suppliers identified as having
significant risk for incidents of
forced or compulsory labor,
and measures to contribute to
the elimination of all forms of
forced or compulsory labor.

85

G3.1 DMAs

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not
reported

Reason for
omission

Explanation for the
reason of omission

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not
reported

Reason
for
omission

To be reported in

Security practices

HR8

Percentage of security
personnel trained in the
organization's policies or
procedures concerning
aspects of human rights that
are relevant to operations.

Fully

Commitment to
Human Rights
UNGC Principles 1-6
- page 38

Total number of incidents of
violations involving rights of
indigenous people and actions
taken.

Fully

Commitment to
Human Rights
UNGC Principles 1-6
- page 38

Percentage and total number
of operations that have been
subject to human rights
reviews and/or impact
assessments.

Fully

Commitment to
Human Rights
- page 38

Number of grievances related
to human rights filed,
addressed and resolved
through formal
grievance mechanisms.

Fully

Commitment to
Human Rights
- page 38

Indigenous rights

HR9

Assessment

HR10

Remediation

HR11

Social: Society

Indicator

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

Local communities

SO1

Percentage of operations with
implemented local community
engagement, impact
assessments, and
development programs.

Fully

Corporate Social
Responsibility
- page 45

SO9

Operations with significant
potential or actual negative
impacts on local communities.

Fully

Corporate Social
Responsibility
- page 45

SO10

Prevention and mitigation
measures implemented in
operations with significant
potential or actual negative
impacts on local communities.

Fully

Corporate Social
Responsibility
- page 45

Fully

Serving as an Ethical
Exemplar
UNGC Principle 10
- page 23

Corruption

SO2

86

Percentage and total number
of business units analyzed for
risks related to corruption.

Level of
reporting

G3.1 DMAs

Disclosure

Location of disclosure

So3

Percentage of employees
trained in organization's anticorruption policies and
procedures.

Fully

Serving as an Ethical
Exemplar
UNGC Principle 10
- page 23

SO4

Actions taken in response to
incidents of corruption.

Fully

Serving as an Ethical
Exemplar
UNGC Principle 10
- page 23

SO5

Public policy positions and
participation in public policy
development and lobbying.

Fully

Apolitical Stance
- page 14

SO6

Total value of financial and inkind contributions to political
parties, politicians, and related
institutions by country.

Fully

Apolitical Stance
- page 14

Total number of legal actions
for anti-competitive behavior,
anti-trust, and monopoly
practices and their outcomes.

Fully

Ethics and Compliance
- page 21

Monetary value of significant
fines and total number of nonmonetary sanctions for noncompliance with laws and
regulations.

Fully

Ethics and Compliance
- page 21

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not
reported

Reason for
omission

Explanation for the
reason of omission

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not

Reason
for
omission

To be reported in

Public policy

Anti-competitive behavior

SO7

Compliance

SO8

Social: Product Responsibility

Indicator

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

Customer health and safety

PR1

Life cycle stages in which
health and safety impacts of
products and services are
assessed for improvement, and
percentage of significant
products and services
categories subject to such
procedures.

Fully

Sustainability in
Marketing
- page 29

PR2

Total number of incidents of
non-compliance with
regulations and voluntary
codes concerning health and
safety impacts of products and
services during their life cycle,
by type of outcomes.

Fully

Sustainability in
Marketing
- page 29

87

G3.1 DMAs

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

For partially
reported
disclosures,
indicate the
part not
reported

Reason for
omission

Product and service labelling

PR3

Type of product and service
information required by
procedures, and percentage of
significant products and
services subject to such
information requirements.

Fully

Sustainability in
Marketing
- page 29

PR4

Total number of incidents of
non-compliance with
regulations and voluntary
codes concerning product and
service information and
labeling, by type of outcomes.

Fully

Sustainability in
Marketing
- page 29

PR5

Practices related to customer
satisfaction, including results
of surveys measuring
customer satisfaction.

Fully

Stakeholder
Engagement
- page 13

PR6

Programs for adherence to
laws, standards, and voluntary
codes related to marketing
communications, including
advertising, promotion,
and sponsorship.

Fully

Brand Building
- page 28

PR7

Total number of incidents of
non-compliance with
regulations and voluntary
codes concerning marketing
communications, including
advertising, promotion,
and sponsorship by type
of outcomes.

Fully

Brand Building
- page 28

Marketing communications

Customer privacy
PR8

Total number of substantiated
complaints regarding breaches
of customer privacy and losses
of customer data.

Partially

Information Security
and Data Privacy
UNGC Principle 1
- page 26

Compliance

PR9

88

Monetary value of significant
fines for non-compliance with
laws and regulations
concerning the provision and
use of products and services.

Fully

Sustainability in
Marketing - pages 29

While the
Company
reports on
the systems
and
process for
addressing
this
indicator,
the
numbers
are not
disclosed
publically

Proprietary
information

Explanation for the
reason of omission

External Assurance

89

External Assurance

90

External Assurance

91

CONTACT
Corporate Headquarters
TCS House
Raveline Street
Fort Mumbai 400 001
Maharashtra
India
Phone 6778 9999 Fax 6778 9000 www.tcs.com
Please email any feedback/queries to corporate.sustainability@tcs.com

About Tata Consultancy Services (TCS)
Tata Consultancy Services is an IT services, consulting and business solutions organization that
delivers real results to global business, ensuring a level of certainty no other firm can match.
TCS offers a consulting-led, integrated portfolio of IT and IT-enabled infrastructure, engineering
and assurance services. This is delivered through its unique Global Network Delivery ModelTM,
recognized as the benchmark of excellence in software development. A part of the Tata Group,
India’s largest industrial conglomerate, TCS has a global footprint and is listed on the National
Stock Exchange and Bombay Stock Exchange in India.

IT Services
Business Solutions
Consulting
All content / information present here is the exclusive property of Tata Consultancy Services Limited (TCS). The content / information contained here is
correct at the time of publishing. No material from here may be copied, modified, reproduced, republished, uploaded, transmitted, posted or distributed in
any form without prior written permission from TCS. Unauthorized use of the content / information appearing here may violate copyright, trademark and
other applicable laws, and could result in criminal or civil penalties.
Copyright © 2015 Tata Consultancy Services Limited

TCS Design Services I M I 09 I 15

For more information, visit us at www.tcs.com

