Corporate Sustainability Report

2013-14

CARBON FOOTPRINT

SOLAR ENERGY

DIVERSITYCOMMITMENT
SAFETY ENVIRONMENT

TALENT HEALTH WELLNESS

AGILITY

SUSTAINABILITY

GLOBAL COMPACT WASTE

ECONOMIC IMPACT

WATER BIO DIVERSITY
RENEWABLE ENERGY

COMMUNITYSUPPLY CHAIN

RENEWABLE ENERGY

Contents
About The Report

4

CEO's Message

5

Organizational Proﬁle

7

Stakeholder Engagement And Materiality Deﬁnition

13

Our Sustainability Strategy & Corporate Governance

17

Our Marketplace

24

Our Workforce

33

Our Community

45

Our Environment

56

Our Suppliers

76

GRI Index

78

External Assurance

90

Contact

94

TCS Corporate Sustainability Report 2014

Report Application Level
2014

* Please see GRI Application Level Check Statement page 91

About The Report
TCS publishes Sustainability Reports annually, the last
report being for Financial Year 2012-13.This is our Eighth
Sustainability Report, for Financial Year 2013-14 (April to
March). It has been prepared in conformance to the G3.1
Sustainability Reporting Guidelines published by the Global
Reporting Initiative (GRI). The report addresses the key
sustainability topics gleaned through interactions with the
diﬀerent stakeholder groups, based on the core principles
of materiality and stakeholder inclusiveness. These topics
cover the full range of material economic, social and
environmental impacts of the organization. The report
boundaries and exclusions are provided below:
Data measurement techniques and the bases of
calculations and estimates are furnished in the relevant
areas of the report. We don't believe there is any substantial
divergence from the GRI Indicator Protocols.

04

There have been no signiﬁcant changes from the last
reporting period in the scope, boundary, or measurement
methods applied in the report. There has been no
restatement of information provided
in earlier reports. The data is sourced from Ultimatix, our core
enterprise platform which runs all internal processes in HR,
Finance and Project Management and is also the portal for
employees to provide
their opinions and feedback. All the data is audited by
relevant third party auditors as part of ISO and ﬁnancial
audits.
This report has been externally assured by KPMG. The scope
and basis of the assurance are described in the assurance
letter issued by KPMG. No other relationship exists between
TCS and KPMG.

Data

Basis

Exclusions

Financial

TCS' Consolidated, Global Operations

None

Human Resources

TCS Ltd.'s global operations, including wholly
owned subsidiaries

Subsidiaries not wholly owned by
TCS (accounting for 3.6% of
consolidated headcount).

Environmental

Delivery centers in India and UK, Hungary, China,
Philippines, Chile, Uruguay and Mexico.

Remaining delivery centers outside India
(accounting for approx. 4% of headcount)

CEO's Message
Dear Stakeholders,
TCS sustained its momentum in 2013-14 and posted industry leading
rates of growth and proﬁtability to drive a stronger competitive
position in the market. We recorded growth across all markets, and I
strongly believe we have more opportunities going ahead. We are also
living in the middle of a fundamental economic shift driven by a clutch
of new digital technologies. I believe TCS is in pole position to help our
customers reimagine their business using these technologies like cloud,
big-data, social, mobile and robotics – commonly referred to as the
Digital 5 Forces.
What is equally important is that we have been able to sustain our strong commitment towards sustainability by ensuring energy
eﬃciency, driving carbon footprint reduction as well as deploying Green IT, water eﬃciency, waste management and supply chain
sustainability programs. We have adopted a holistic approach towards environment protection. Our green campuses have played a
critical role in decoupling business growth and the impact on the environment. Our green data centers and building renewable
energy sources remain a key focus area. With these initiatives, we are on-track and strongly positioned to achieve the targets we
have set for ourselves as a part of our environmental sustainability roadmap.
Beyond business, TCS continues to be active in playing a strong role in society. We have taken giant steps in promoting STEM careers
across the world. We recently announced an expansion of our goIT student technology awareness program, initially launched in
2009 in Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
The program is reaching 10 cities across North America in 2014 with an objective to prepare underserved groups, at-risk youth, girls,
and minorities for STEM careers. The goIT initiative involves skilled TCS employee volunteers teaching computer science in 35 school
districts, training the teachers to make such courses more engaging as well as conducting summer camps for over 7,000 students
since 2009. TCS' larger STEM eﬀorts include serving as a US2020 Founding Leadership Partner, a national STEM movement that aims
to engage one million STEM professionals in mentorship opportunities by the year 2020. TCS also facilitated a 'Computer Science
Education: Progress, State-by-State, City-by-City' roundtable event with STEM connector in May this year, and is the Founding
Partner of Million Women Mentors.
We continue to nurture talent with diversity. Today, the best talent from across the globe is working together to oﬀer our best
solutions and capabilities to our customers. It is this power of 'One TCS', combined with our expertise and investments in new digital
technologies that we will be harnessing further to ensure we stay relevant to all our stakeholders.
As an organisation, we are also extremely serious about the health and wellbeing of our employees. To promote a culture of
personal safety and security, I launched the SafetyFirst initiative. We now have a dedicated team within TCS to look after the safety
aspects of our employees, with a Corporate Safety Leader and Safety Champions across branches driving the initiative. Our Fit4Life
initiative that had begun two years ago has received tremendous response from TCSers, and with each year, it's just getting bigger
and better.
Early this year, we also launched Purpose4Life, an initiative to motivate and enable our employees to contribute towards societal
well-being. Through this program, we are providing a platform to TCSers to commit a minimum of 10 hours in a year towards
activities that would be based on our CSR themes of education, health and environment. TCS has already been actively involved in
various CSR initiatives in the past. Through Purpose4Life, we have extended these in a more structured manner, which can involve
more TCSers. I believe we are at a vantage point to make a positive impact to the world around us, considering the collective
strength of our 300,464 employees and the geographical reach we have.
I am pleased to conﬁrm that Tata Consultancy Services reaﬃrms its support of the Ten Principles of the United Nations Global
Compact in the areas of Human Rights, Labour, Environment and Anti-Corruption.
TCS will continue to work towards inclusive growth, where each of our stakeholders is equally valuable and that includes the
community in which we operate. I believe in what our founder Jamsetji Tata once said, "In a free enterprise, the community is not
just another stakeholder in business but is in fact the very purpose of its existence.”
Regards,
N. Chandrasekaran
CEO & MD, TCS

05

Organizational
Profile

Organizational Profile
Tata Consultancy Services Limited (TCS) is an IT services, business solutions and outsourcing organization that
delivers real results to global businesses, with a high level of certainty. TCS oﬀers a consulting-led, complete and
integrated portfolio of IT and IT-enabled services delivered through its unique Global Network Delivery Model
(GNDM™), recognized as an industry benchmark of excellence in distributed software development.
Founded in 1968 as part of the Tata group, TCS is headquartered in Mumbai, India and is a public limited company¹,
listed on the National Stock Exchange (NSE) and Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) in India. In FY 2014, TCS reported
consolidated revenues of USD 13.44 billion.

Mission and Values
TCS has built a global reputation for its ability to help
customers achieve their business objectives – by
providing innovative, best-in-class consulting, IT and
IT-enabled solutions and services. TCS' core set of
values underpin all activities in the Company and
these include leadership with trust, integrity,
excellence, respect for the individual and
learning/sharing.

Business Overview
TCS is an Information Technology (IT) services,
consulting and business solutions company that
delivers measurable results to global enterprises. The
Company's full services portfolio consists of
Application Development and Maintenance, Business
Intelligence, Enterprise Solutions, Assurance Services,
Engineering and Industrial Services, IT Infrastructure
Services, Business Process Outsourcing, Consulting and
Asset leveraged solutions. In addition, the Company
has launched several new service oﬀerings around
Mobility, Social computing, Big Data and the Cloud.
The Company has built strong domain capabilities in a
range of industry verticals, positioning itself as a
strategic partner capable of reliably delivering
innovative technology-led solutions to business
problems. Key industry verticals serviced by the
Company are: Banking, Financial Services and
Insurance (BFSI), Retail and Consumer Packaged
Goods, Telecom, Media and Entertainment, Hi-Tech,
Manufacturing, Life Sciences and Healthcare (LSHC),
Energy, Resources and Utilities (ERU), and Travel,
Transportation and Hospitality (TTH).

%

4.60

0%

30

0%

2.

3.4

3.8

BFSI

%

Retail & Distribution

5.40

%

Telecom
Manufacturing

5.80%

42.90%

Life Sciences & Healthcare
Hi Tech
Others

8.50%

Energy & Utility
Travel & Hospitality
%
9.50

Media & Entertainment
13.80%
Figure 1: Revenue break-up by industry vertical

1 Please refer to our FY2014 Annual Report for details of the shareholding pattern (Page 81), changes in the capital structure during FY2014 (Page 112) and the complete
list of Subsidiaries (Pages 184-185). Our Annual Report can be accessed from our website. The URL is:
http://www.tcs.com/investors/Documents/Annual%20Reports/TCS_Annual_Report_2013-2014.pdf

08

Global Footprint
The Company has also been steadily expanding its geographic footprint. In addition to the traditional markets for
its services – namely, North America, United Kingdom and Continental Europe, the Company has been expanding
its presence in emerging markets like Asia-Pacific, India, Latin America and Middle East & Africa.
As of March 31, 2014, TCS had 226 offices across 46 countries. The break-up of offices by geography is as below :

24 24 24
USA and
Canada

UK and
Ireland

12 Countries
Asia Pacific

14

9

In addition, our Global Delivery
Network Model (GNDM™) consists of
a network of 150 delivery supporting
centers located in
23 countries (See Figure 2) that
uniquely positions us to deliver our
world class services seamlessly to
any location in the world.

8 Countries
Middle East
and Africa

8 Countries
Latin America

32 99

13 Countries
Europe

The revenue breakup by
geography is provided in Figure 3.

India

Europe 8

UK 4
N. America 10

MEA 3
Latin America

India 108

APAC 8

9

Figure 2: TCS' Global Network Delivery footprint

0%

0%

0%

2.1

2.3

6.7

North America

7.20%

UK
Continental Europe
Asia Paciﬁc

11.20%
53.00%

India
Latin America
MEA

17.50%

Figure 3: Revenue Breakup by Geography

09
33

TCS by Numbers
Net Sales

$13.44 Bn

Net Income

$3.14 Bn

Taxes

$996 Mn
$10.3 Bn

Retained earnings

$11.5 Bn

Total Assets
Market Capitalization
(on March 31, 2014)

$70.2 Bn

Number of Employees
(on March 31, 2014)

300,464

Number of nationalities
in the workforce
Employee Costs
in USD

118

Mn 7,544

% of women in the
workforce

New hires in FY 2014

Attrition in IT Services*
Reduction in per capita
paper consumption**

32.7%

29.0%

Operating Margin

Clients contributing
more than $1 Mn/year

714

Clients contributing
more than $100 Mn/year

24

Number of
shareholders

598,756

Number of small
shareholders (holding
nominal share capital
upto INR 1 Lakh)

593,170

Volunteering eﬀort in
CSR (person hours)*

Investment in CSR
initiatives*

96,499
` 93.58 cr

Reduction in per capita
electricity consumed**

Reduction in per capita carbon
footprint (Scope 1 + Scope 2) **

61,200
10.4%

78%

Reduction in per capita business
air travel emissions**

Reduction in per capita
fresh water consumption**

39%

34%
61%
13%

*Excl subsidiaries | # Excl Domestic Clients | ** Reduction given is over baseline year 2007-08 Coverage as per Appendix A

10

Awards

Key awards and accolades received by TCS in
FY 2014 are listed below.

CORPORATE
n India’s ‘Most Valuable Company’ -

BT 500 rankings(2nd year in a row)
n World;s Most Innovative

Companies - Forbes
n India’s Most Admired Company -

Fortune
n India’s Most Respected Company -

Business World

LEADERSHIP
n 100 CEO Leaders in STEM -

STEMConnector
n Business Visionary Award - NDTV

Profit Business Leadership Awards
n Best CEO - Institutional Investor’s

2013 Annual All-Asia Executive
Rankings
n Best CEO - Business Standard

n Global Leaders - Dow Jones

Sustainability World Index

PARTNERS

INVESTORS
n Top Honors - FinanceAsia’s

Investor poll

n Top SI of the year - HP Partner

Summit
n Best Skill Excellence of the year -

HP Partner Summit
n Best Performing IT Vendor of the

Year - Singapore Airlines
n Technology Partner -

TALENT MANAGEMENT
n #1 Top Employer in Netherlands -

Top Employers Institure
(CRF Institute)
n Gold Award for ‘Innovation in

Manufacturing Leadership 100

Learning’ - Learning and

Awards

Performance Institute

n Partner Excellence Award -

Pegasystems, Inc.
n Microsoft Supplier of the Year -

Microsoft
n Partner of the Year Award for APJ -

EMC World
n System Integrator Partner of the

Year - Netapp UK & I Partner
n SAP Pinnacle Award - SAP
n Official Technology Consulting

n ’Achievers 50 Most Engaged’ -

Workplaces in the USA
n Best Employer in China - Eighth

Chinese Employer Brand Awards
n Top Employer in South Africa -

Top Employers Institute
n Best Practices in HR - Argentina
n Excellence in HR Technology
n Platinum Award for Innovation -

Greentech HR Award

Partner - Boston Marathon &
Boston Athletic Association
11

GLOBAL CSR EXCELLENCE AND
LEADERSHIP AWARDS
n Best Company - CSR - Fundacion

Regazo
n Best Corporate Steward Business

Civic Leadership Center - Citizen
- U. S. Chamber of Commerce
Foundation

CAPABILITY AND INNOVATION
n Ranked No.1 for customer

satisfaction in the UK
n Level 5 in the Enterprise-wide

Appraisal - CMMI-DEV v1.3
n Leader in insurance application

outsourcing - Everest Group

n Special Award - Contribution to

n Global Leader & Star Performer in

the Green Building mission -

Life Science IT Outsourcing -

GreenCo Summit 2013

Everest Group

n Best Partnershio in Sports

Corporate Engagement Awards Europe
n Best Program - raise brand

awareness Corporate Engagement
Awards - Europe
n Best community involvement

Corporate Engagement Awards Europe
n Sustainability Disclosure

Leadership Award - Parivartan
n Excellence in Energy Management

- Confederation of Indian
Industries
n Best Volunteering Company - Red

Cross in Ecuador
n Excellence in Green House Gas

Reduction - Earth Care Awards JSW - TOI
n Company with Best Social Service

Practices - Foundation Tierra

n Leader in Retail Banking BPO -

NelsonHall
n IT ‘Innovator of the Year’ -

Microsoft
n Leader in SAP Application

Management - Gartner Magic
Quadrant
n Leader in SAP & Oracle Application

Management Services - Gartner
Magic Quadrant
n Leader Communication Service

Providers - Gartner Magic
Quadrant
n Leader in Finance & Accounting -

BPS - Everest Group
n IT Outsourcing Company of the

Year - Belgium
n Top 10 Global Service Provider in

China - China Council for
International Investment
Promotion

Nueva of Carollo Father
n Global 500 Carbon Performance

COMMUNITY AND ENVIRONMENT

Leadership Index
n Carbon Disclosure Leadership

n Highly Commended - Citi

International Award - Business in

Index.

the Community’s
Responsible Business Awards
n Platinum Big Tick - Business in the

Community’s Responsible
Business Awards

Awards

n Gold Award - APOnline MeeSeva

project -17th National Conference
on e-Governance

12

Stakeholder Engagement &
Materiality Deﬁnition
Our Stakeholders
TCS engages with a broad spectrum of stakeholders, internal and external to understand their concerns and
priorities and use those inputs to guide policy formulation and decision-making. Business (or, in some cases,
policy) considerations largely govern the decision on which stakeholders to engage with and in what manner and
periodicity.
While Customers, Employees and Shareholders are obvious stakeholders, the supply-chain of our people-centric
business consists of various academic institutions, engineering colleges, staffing agencies and other vendors.
Staying at the cutting edge of technological developments requires us to partner with leading technology firms to
develop and market industry-specific solutions.
TCS is a member of a number of industry bodies like NASSCOM and CII and works closely with these bodies in
shaping policy. We interact with governments in the course of regulatory compliance and also in implementing egovernance initiatives or as part of government-facilitated community betterment initiatives. Lastly, we work with
local communities directly or through various NGOs as part of our CSR initiatives in different parts of the world,
and with the larger society.
Described below is TCS' stakeholder interaction framework. Some other stakeholders that we closely engage with,
such as Industry Analysts, Equity Analysts and the media have not been mentioned here because they are proxies
for other named stakeholders – customers, shareholders and the larger society respectively.

Stakeholder

Interfacing Group
Customers

As needed:

Project-related Calls and
meetings, PMRs, Relationship
Meetings, Visits, Responses to
RFI/RFPs, Sponsored Events,
Mailers, Newsletters, Brochures
Employees

As needed:

Town Halls, Roadshows, Project
/ Operations Reviews,
Videoconferences, Audio
conference calls, PEEP, PROPEL
(associate forum), One-on-one
counseling

Engagement Types by Frequency
Sales / Pre-Sales, Marketing, Delivery Teams,
Senior Mgmt
Continuous: TCS website, Customer portal
Half-yearly: Customer Satisfaction Surveys2
Annual:

HR, Senior Mgmt
Monthly:

As needed:

Press Releases and Press
Conferences, Email advisories,
Facility Visits, In-person
meetings, Investor Conferences,
Non-Deal Roadshows,
Conference Calls

@TCS (Inhouse magazine)

Continuous: TCS website, Ultimatix Notice
Board, CEO Connect, CTO Blog,
Corporate Corner, JustAsk,
IdeaMAX, Dipstick surveys,
mPower (quick grievance
redressal)
Annual:

Shareholders

Customer Summit,
Innovation Day

PULSE (employee feedback
survey), Hats Off (Long Service
Awards), Velocity (Sales meet),
Blitz (Business Planning meet)

Investor Relations, Company Secy, Senior Mgmt
Quarterly: Financial Statements in Indian
GAAP and IFRS, Earnings Call,
Exchange Notifications, Press
Conference
Continuous: Investors Page on TCS website
Annual:

Annual General Meeting,
Analyst Day, Annual Report

2 The Survey is done at an account-level and measures TCS' performance on various parameters across multiple dimensions.

13

Interfacing Group

Stakeholder

Head Hunters, Staffing Firms,Other Suppliers
As needed:

Academic Interface Program,
Co-Innovation Network
meetings

Academic Institutions
One time:

RFI/RFPs, Empanelment process

Partners and Collaborators
As needed:

Meetings / Calls, COIN
meetings, Visits, Partner Events

Engagement Types by Frequency
HR, Senior Mgmt, CTO
Continuous: TCS website, Academic portal
Annual:

HR, ISUs, Procurement
As needed: Transactional meetings, Periodic
Reviews, Surveys

Alliance Mgmt, CTO
Monthly:

As needed:

Conferences and seminars,
Working Committee Meetings,
Surveys, Meetings

Governments
As needed:

Governance RFIs / RFPs,
Presentations, Project Meetings,
Reviews, Calls and Meetings,
Surveys, Consultative sessions

NGOs, Local Communities, Society at large
As needed:

Field visits, Due Diligence, Calls
and Meetings, Conferences and
seminars, Surveys, Press
Releases, Press conferences,
Media interviews and quotes,
Sponsored events

Conference Calls

Quarterly: Business Reviews
Annual:

Industry bodies

Sangam (High-level
academic conference),
Campus recruitment

Partner Events

Corporate Affairs, Finance, Senior Mgmt
Annual: Conferences, Summits

Govt ISU, Corporate Affairs, HSE / Finance,
CSR Team, Senior Mgmt
Continuous: TCS Website

CSR Team, Volunteers, Corp Comm, Senior Mgmt
Continuous:

TCS Website

Apolitical Stance
While TCS works closely with consultative bodies of various industry associations in advising
governments on policy formulation or advocating changes to policy, the Company does not spend on
lobbying and maintains an entirely apolitical stance in line with the Tata Code of Conduct. The Company
does not support any specific political party or candidate for political office. Nor does it offer or give any
company funds or property as donations to any political party, candidate or campaign.

14

Definition of Content
The content for this report is arrived at by applying a materiality filter on the various topics that come up in the
course of stakeholder interactions described in the earlier section. A team of senior managers evaluated these
topics for materiality to the business to arrive at the key sustainability topics for coverage in this report,
summarized in the table below:
Stakeholders

Material Topics

Customers

Business knowledge, Delivery capability, Quality, Data privacy and
security, Ethical behavior, Fair business practices

Employees

Safe and comfortable workplace, Engaging assignments, Learning
opportunities, Career development, Compensation structure

Shareholders

Continued revenue growth, Profitability, Cashflows, Corporate
Governance, Transparency and Disclosure, Dividend payouts

Academic Institutions

Job creation, Curriculum enhancement, Internship opportunities,
Faculty development

Vendors, Partners
and Collaborators

Ethical behavior, Fair business practices, Governance, Sustainability
of Demand, Credit-worthiness

Governments/NGOs
/Local Communities

Good governance, Ethics and Compliance, Support for developmental
programs, Job opportunities, Responsible Citizenry

Society at large

Environmental impact

15

Our Sustainability
Strategy and
Corporate Governance

Sustainability Strategy and Approach
TCS embodies the Tata group's philosophy of building sustainable businesses that are ﬁrmly rooted in the community
and demonstrate care for the environment. Towards this, TCS has adopted the 'triple bottom-line' approach and
recognizes that People, Planet and Proﬁt as the central pillars of corporate sustainability.

Profits

Sustainable
Marketplace

Business
Focus

Governance

Environment
Focus
Environment
Sustainability
Planet

Internal & External

Internal stakeholders
of sustainability
Key elements of sustainability
Triple Bottom Line

People
Focus

Sustainable
Communities
Internal & External

People

People: Sustainable Internal and External Communities – Internally, 300,464 employees are the backbone of TCS,
who are actively engaged with to drive sustainability initiatives. Externally, TCS conducts a diverse range of CSR
initiatives in the areas of education & skill building, health environment and aﬃrmative action using volunteering,
sponsorships and pro bono leveraging of our IT capabilities as the modes of engagement. In addition initiatives
focused at promoting supply chain and procurement sustainability ensure the alignment of that our vendors and
suppliers to the sustainability objectives.
Planet: Environmental Sustainability – From designing sustainable infrastructure, running eﬃcient operations, to
engaging with our supply chain partners in green procurement and disposal activities; TCS takes a holistic approach
towards reducing its energy, water, material, waste and carbon footprint. TCS oﬃces as well as IT infrastructure are
sustainably designed and built for maximum resource eﬃciency.
Proﬁt: Sustainable Marketplace – In addition to ensuring sustainability of the Company's business performance, a
dedicated eco-sustainability team works across industry verticals with an aim to provide next-generation
sustainability services to customers. Integrating sustainability into business strategies and unlocking environmental
eﬃciencies in the entire value chain is a signiﬁcant value add.
Corporate Governance
Strong corporate governance that oversees business strategies and ensures ﬁscal accountability, ethical corporate
behavior and fairness to all stakeholders, creates all the conditions necessary to foster sustainability. Being part of the
146-year old Tata group which epitomizes sustainability, TCS has inherited a strong legacy of fair, transparent and
ethical governance, as embodied in the Tata Code of Conduct³ (TCoC).

3 The full text of the Tata Code of Conduct is available on our website.
(URL: http://www.tcs.com/SiteCollectionDocuments/About%20TCS/Tata-Code-Conduct-2013.pdf)

18

This is aligned with the ten principles articulated in the UN Global Compact to which TCS is a signatory.
At the top of the governance structure is the Board of Directors representing the shareholders, and various
Committees on the Board, overseeing the Executive Management. TCS has a unitary board structure consisting of
11 members of whom 10 are Non-Executive Directors⁴ (including the Chairman and Vice-Chairman) and 6 are
Independent Directors⁵. The composition of our Board and detailed proﬁles of Board Members are available on
our website⁶.
The supervisory capability of the current Board has been signiﬁcantly boosted by the inclusion of highly capable
individuals with diverse global management perspectives, broad corporate experience and speciﬁc expertise in
corporate governance and compliance as independent, non-executive directors.
Board of Directors
C P Mistry N Chandrasekaran S Ramadorai R Sommer C M Christensen

V Kelkar P A Vandrevala V Thyagarajan I Hussain

A Mehta

O P Bhatt

Demographic Background
Gender
Male

Yes

Yes

X

X

Yes

Yes

Yes

X

X

X

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

X

X

X

X

X

Female
Age
25-40
41-55
56-70

X

Over 70

Aspect

How

Conflict of interest between the Board's executive function and the supervisory
Avoidance of Conflict
of Interest
function
is minimized
by making below:
the Chairmanship of the Board a non-executive role,
Different
aspects of TCS’ Corporate
Governance
are addressed
and keeping it separate from that of the Chief Executive Officer and Managing
Director.
TCS has a Code of Conduct for Non-Executive Directors, requiring them to always act in
the interest of the company and ensure that any other business or personal
association, which they may have, does not involve any conflict of interest with the
operations of the company and their role therein.
Similarly, all employees including the Managing Director and Executive Directors are
prohibited from freelancing or accepting any position of responsibility with or without
remuneration with any other company without TCS' written approval. For Executive
Directors and the Managing Director, such approval must be obtained from the Board.
Intra-group
Transactions

TCS does not derive any material revenues (~0.002% of revenues in FY 2014) from
other Tata group companies. There is no intermingling of employees and resources
including cash amongst the Group companies.
Independent Directors make up half the Board. Any dealing with Tata Sons or with a
group company is done on an arms-length basis and has to be approved by the Board.
Such transactions are reviewed closely by the Board to ensure that all shareholders'
interests are protected before they are approved. All transactions with Tata group
companies are disclosed in our Annual Report (Page 134-136).

4 A Non-Executive Director is defined as a Director who is not involved in the day-to-day operations of the Company and is not a full-time employee of the
Company.
5 An Independent Director is a Non-Executive Director, who (a) does not have any material relationship/ transaction with the Company, its Directors,
Promoters, senior management, holding company and its subsidiaries, (b) Is not related to Promoters/Board/Senior Management, (c) Has not been an
executive of the Company in the past 3 years, (d) Has not been a partner/executive of the Company's statutory audit/ internal audit firm, legal/consulting
firm in the past 3 years, (e) Has not been a material supplier, service-provider or customer or a lessor or lessee of the company, (f) Is not a substantial
shareholder i.e. owning 2% or more and (g) Is not less than 21 years of age.
6 http://www.tcs.com/about/corp_facts/board_directors/Pages/default.aspx

19

Aspect

How

Board Oversight of the
Sustainability Agenda

To ensure that business sustainability gets adequate governance focus, TCS' Board of
Directors meets 7 to 8 times a year instead of the statutory 4 times. While four of these
meetings are for review and approval of financial results, the remainder is for more
detailed oversight of business, strategy and sustainability matters.
This ensures that the Board's focus goes beyond financial performance and covers
various operational and strategic issues including sustainability aspects, budgets,
industry performance, peer review and competition analysis, overall risk assessment,
performance of subsidiaries, opportunities for organic and inorganic growth etc.
The CEO is the Director responsible for Sustainability. Oversight of the Company's
sustainability strategy is the responsibility of the Sustainability Head, EVP & Global
Head HR. He is supported by the Sustainability Council and dedicated teams for
Corporate Social Responsibility and Environment, each headed by highly-qualified
specialists in their respective domains. Their goals are determined by Senior
Management in line with the Company's overall sustainability objectives, and
performance on these two specific aspects of TCS' sustainability agenda is reviewed by
the Board on an annual basis. A framework to enable the Board's self-evaluation is
currently under review.
The Sustainability Council
In order to drive our sustainability initiatives effectively, a sustainability council with
representation from key departments within TCS has been convened. Processes for
quarterly review on performance against targets for each stakeholder have also been
implemented.
The Executive Vice President and Global Head of HR presides over all matters related to
Sustainability within the organization and the overall Corporate Sustainability of the
organization falls within the purview of the CEO & MD.

Board Level Committee
(including CEO & MD - Director Responsible for
Corporate Sustainability)

Executive Vice-President & Global Head-HR
Head - Corporate Sustainability

Sustainability Council
Representatives from...
Internal
IT

20

Infrastructure,
Planning &
Development

Administration

Health, Safety &
Environment

Human
Resources

Corporate Social
Responsibility

TCS Maitree

EcoSustainability
Services

Corporate
Communications

Investor
Relations

Aspect
Fiscal Oversight

How
An Audit Committee, consisting entirely of independent, non-executive Directors,
oversees TCS' disclosure process to ensure that sufficient and credible information is
disclosed, and that the published financial statements reflect a true and fair position
of the company's finances.
The committee meets four times a year to approve the quarterly accounts and
another three to four times for an in-depth consideration of internal audit reports.
The Audit Committee also actively ensures that the internal audit processes provide
adequate support in improving the Company's business processes, i.e., making the
Company more efficient and cost-effective.
As an additional governance control on access to the Company's cash, TCS has a Bank
Account Committee of Directors which approves the opening and closing of bank
accounts of the Company and to authorize persons to operate the bank accounts of
the Company.

Independent and
Effective Validation

TCS has an independent third party, M/s Ernst and Young, to oversee and carry out
internal audits of the Company's operations as per an internal audit plan which is
reviewed annually by the Audit Committee in consultation with the Statutory
Auditors. In line with international practice, the planning and conduct of internal
audit is oriented towards the review of controls in the management of risks and
opportunities in the Company's activities. The external auditors of the Company are
Deloitte Haskins and Sells, who do not have any undue dependence on TCS.

Disclosure and
Transparency

Benchmarked against global peers, TCS discloses significant - operational and
financial metrics on a quarterly basis. The quarterly, half-yearly and annual results are
published in leading Indian newspapers, emailed out to analysts and investors who
subscribe to that service and posted on our website
http://www.tcs.com/investors/Documents/Annual%20Reports/TCS_Annual_Report_
2013-2014.pdf. Half-yearly results are sent to shareholders along with a message
from the Managing Director on the Company's performance.
The Earnings Release every quarter is accompanied by a press-conference which is
video webcast live through our website. There is also a conference call where
Management briefs investors and analysts on the quarter gone by, and takes
questions.
In addition, there is a robust investor outreach program as part of which the TCS
Management meets investors at our premises or at investor conferences and
addresses their queries and concerns.

Ethics and
Compliance7

The Tata Code of Conduct, which every employee signs at the time of joining the
company, contains 25 clauses that make up a governing framework for responsible
corporate citizenship and ethical behaviour. TCS has established procedures to
deploy the TCoC and to enable employees, customers, suppliers and partners to
understand the code and follow it in letter and spirit.
The leadership team personally conveys TCS' values and the importance of the TCoC
at employee events. There are Local Ethics Counsellors at every Company location to
advise and guide employees on ethical matters.
Customers and suppliers are made aware of the TCoC through specific clauses in
proposals, contracts, contract discussions, and through the TCS website.
In addition, senior managers with access to privileged information, have to comply
with an additional code for the Prevention of Insider Trading. TCS also has a global
policy to address Sexual Harassment at the work place. This policy was updated in
February 2014 to align with current legal mandates, in particular the “Sexual
Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act,
2013” enacted in India where TCS has the majority of its workforce.
At the Board level, the Ethics and Compliance Committee oversees TCS' compliance
to the Codes of Conduct to be followed by the Directors, Officers and other
employees. Monthly Reports are sent to the Committee on matters relating to the
Insider Trading Code and the TCoC. One meeting of the Ethics and Compliance
Committee was held during the year.

7 No significant legal or regulatory non-compliance in general or specifically in relation to the Company’s products and services was brought to the
Company’s attention in Fy2014.

21

Aspect
Board Composition
and Selection of Board
Members

How
The Nominations Committee, consisting of two independent Directors and the
Chairman, makes recommendations regarding the composition of the Board,
identifies suitable individuals who can be inducted as Independent Directors and
takes steps to refresh the composition of the Board from time to time.
The supervisory capability of the current Board has been significantly boosted by
the inclusion of highly capable individuals with global management perspectives,
broad corporate experience and specific expertise in corporate governance and
compliance as independent, non-executive directors.

Protecting Minority
shareholders' interests

The Corporate Governance philosophy at TCS, based on the Tata Code of Conduct,
emphasizes fairness and transparency to all stakeholders. The Company also has a
variety of channels through which minority shareholders can interact with the
Management / Board to express their concerns.
There is a year-round, global investor outreach program where investors can
interact with Management. Minority shareholders can move their private
resolutions for discussion by the Board of Directors, or even requisition a General
Body Meeting.
Small shareholders can interact with the Board of Directors in person at the Annual
General Meeting and have their queries/grievances resolved. They can also
communicate any grievance to the Company Secretary's office where complaints
are tracked to closure. At the Board level, a Shareholders/Investors Grievance
Committee of Directors consisting of two Independent Directors and one Nonindependent Director oversees the redressal of these complaints. independent
Director oversees the redressal of these complaints.

Employee access to
the Board

Employees at TCS are highly empowered and the Company's culture encourages
open communications and offers various channels for communicating concerns
and grievances. Larger concerns are represented to the Board by the Executive
Directors. In addition, individual senior-level employees are also invited to present
to the Board on specific topics under discussion, from time to time.
Lastly, we have a Whistle Blower Policy, with the necessary mechanism for
employees to directly report concerns about unethical behavior to the Chairperson
of the Audit Committee, without fear of reprisal or victimization.about unethical
behavior to the Chairperson of the Audit Committee.

Sustainability and risk
management

TCS has an Enterprise-wide Risk Management (ERM) process administered by a Risk
Office that continually identifies the various risks threatening the Company's
continued sustainability, as grouped under:
(1) Strategic
(2) Operational
(3) Financial and
(4) Compliance related risks
The Risk Office maintains a Risk Register and draws up suitable risk mitigation
plans for each of the risks identified therein. These risks are reviewed by the
Board periodically.

Succession planning

Business sustainability requires consistency in management vision and
minimization of impact when there is a leadership change. Therefore, succession
planning is an important element in ensuring smooth transitions. At TCS,
succession planning occurs at every level – at the corporate level, at the business
unit level, at the account level and even at the project level.
At the highest level, succession planning of senior management is directly
reviewed by the Executive Committee of the Board. Business/Unit Heads are
invited to Board Meetings from time to time to give presentations to the Board to
update them. This provides an opportunity for the Board to interact with Senior
Executives periodically and assess values, competencies and capabilities to help
them identify suitable internal successors and provide feedback.
In these last four decades, TCS has gone through two CEO-level transitions, the last
one in October 2009. The seamless manner in which that transition took place is
evidence that the Company's succession planning is working well.Company’s
succession planning has been functioning well.

22

Aspect

How

Remuneration Policy

TThe Company follows a compensation mix of fixed pay, benefits and Economic
Value Added Analysis based variable pay. Individual performance pay is determined
by business performance and the performance of the individuals measured through
the annual appraisal process.
Compensation for Non-Executive Directors on the Board consists of:
n

n

n

Sitting Fees for attending Board meetings and meetings of Committees of the
Board, to the tune of INR 10,000 per meeting.
Commission, as decided by the Board of Directors and approved by members at
the Annual General Meeting, within the ceiling of 1% of the net profits of the
Company as computed under the Companies Act, 1956. The commission is
distributed amongst the Non-Executive Directors based on their attendance and
contribution at the Board and certain Committee meetings, as well as the time
spent on operational matters other than at meetings.
Reimbursement of any out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the Directors for
attending meetings.

Remuneration of the Managing Director and Executive Directors consists of a fixed
component (salary, benefits, perquisites and allowances) and a performance-liked
variable component (commission).
The Remuneration Committee decides the annual increments within the salary scale
approved by the Members, and the commission payable to the Managing Director
and the Executive Directors out of the profits for the financial year and within the
ceilings prescribed under law. The commission amount is based on the company's
performance as well as that of the Managing Director and each Executive Director,
measured along several sustainability-linked criteria discussed in this report. Details
of the compensation paid out to Members of the Board in FY 2014 are disclosed on
Page 74 of our Annual Report.

Serving as an Ethical Exemplar
TCS regards integrity as a core value that underpins all business activities. The Company has earned its
reputation of trustworthiness through several decades of consistent, value-driven conduct.
TCS adopted the Tata Code of Conduct (TCoC) which is signed by every employee on joining and which s
erves as a guide on values, ethics and business principles. Training on TCoC is a mandatory part of the induction
process for all associates. Awareness towards the TCoC is promoted by organizing road-shows, compliance
workshops and an annual Ethics Week featuring quizzes, essay-writing contests etc. A Whistleblower Policy has
also been incorporated through which instances of malfeasance can be reported directly to the Board without
fear of reprisal.
The outcome of this corporate-wide emphasis on ethical behavior, integrity and individual accountability is a
very high level of employee awareness of the Company's values. The satisfaction index of the awareness of the
Tata Code of Conduct within TCS' employee satisfaction survey was 78.02.
The fact that the Company has been able to build a strong, highly successful, global business adhering to the
high ethical standards makes TCS a moral exemplar. In all contracts a clause addressing the TCoC is explicitly
mentioned to customers, partners, suppliers and all other vendors. Active participation in international and
Tata Group forums ensures that these best practices are shared amongst all stakeholders.
The Company's policies and training modules have been periodically reviewed and revised to comply with the
legislations with respect to bribery, corruption and business ethics.
Since the Company's primary focus is Information Technology (IT), a special training module on IT Ethics has
been created in co-operation with Prof. Don Gotterbarn, Professor Emeritus from Tennessee State University.
Prof. Gotterbarn is a world-renowned professional expert on Computing Ethics who has been recognized by
three diﬀerent professional organizations for his contribution to promotion of computing ethics. In March-April
2014, Dr. Gotterbarn visited India at the invitation of TCS and recorded training sessions on IT Ethics which are
being cascaded across the organization.

23

Our Marketplace
Sustainability of Business Performance
Key stakeholder concerns around the sustainability of our business performance are centered around
ﬁve major areas:
n

whether there is suﬃcient headroom for continued growth

n

whether the Company's size could impede agility

n

whether supplyside constraints could hamper growth or impact margins

n

whether macroeconomic uncertainties or new technologies might impair business

n

whether the company is investing suﬃciently in innovation

Some of these concerns are addressed in this section of the report.
Key strategic risks faced by TCS and our approach to mitigating them are summarized on Page 36 of our FY 2014
Annual Report.

Strategy for long-term growth
TCS' revenue growth comes from following a multi-pronged strategy built around
(a)Expanding our addressable market by geography, by industry and by service-line and
(b)Deepening our relationships with existing clients.
Key elements of this strategy for sustainable, longer-term growth are summarized in and explained in greater detail
on Pages 32-33 of our FY 2014 Annual Report.

Customer
Centricity

Experience
Certainty

Full Services
Portfolio

Strategy for
Long-term
Sustainable
Growth

Non Linear
Business Models

GNDMTM

Figure 4: Five point strategy for long term growth

24

Demand-side Sustainability
TCS has had a consistently stellar track-record of revenue growth. Our 9-year CAGR is 22% and we closed FY 2014
with revenue of USD 13.44 Bn (up 16.2% YoY).

16000

78%

Revenue in USD Mn

14000

76%

12000
74%

10000
8000

72%

6000

70%

4000
68%

2000
0

operating Costs as % of Rev

Revenue and Cost Trend: FY 2005 - FY 2014

66%
FY05

FY06

FY07

FY08

FY09

Rev in USD Mn

FY10

FY11

FY12

FY13

Fy14

Operating Costs as % of Rev

Figure 5: Revenue Growth in USD (FY 2005-2014)
Other highlights of FY 2014:
n
n
n
n

Volume growth of 17.4% YoY
Gross Margin of 47.3%, EBIT margin of 29.1%
Gross headcount addition of 61,200
Net headcount addition of 24,268

TCS believes that the long term growth trajectory is sustainable because (a) the global market for IT services is
growing, (b) offshore outsourcing is today a mainstream strategic option, (b) TCS has the strong foundational
elements needed to partake of this growth and (c) TCS' strategy for longer-term growth is delivering results.

Global market: Headroom for growth
According to NASSCOM's Strategic Review 2014, global spend on IT Services and BPO was estimated to be
$922 Bn in 2013, i.e. 1.8% higher than in 2012. This is a highly fragmented market in which our market share is
~1.4%, suggesting significant headroom for growth.
Going forward, technology spending is expected to further increase as the technology intensity of businesses
increases. The 5-year CAGR for the period 2012-2018 is expected to be 4.5% according to Gartner. Historically,
TCS' growth is far higher than the growth in global spend on IT services due to shifting customer preferences
favoring greater offshore outsourcing.

Enablers for growth
The pre-requisites for sustaining our growth are:
(a) maintaining the same high quality of service that our customers have come to expect from us,
(b) continuing to invest in innovation so we remain at the cutting edge of technological and
business evolution,
(c) ensuring that we remain agile despite the size and
(d) creating a strong brand that creates customer loyalty.
In the next few sub-sections, we explore these four foundational elements in further detail.

25

Best-in-class Quality
The TCS Quality Management System is a complete set of documents, tools, methods and practices built on and
around the business model, with a focus on service & solution delivery, customer management, security management
and people processes. The system is focused on ensuring that customers experience a level of certainty that no other
organization can match.
Every project executed by TCS goes through a three-tier quality check to ensure that the customer receives a
deliverable of the highest quality:

Product Quality

Product Quality
& Process
Compliance

Internal Quality Assurance

All work items, products or
deliverables undergo peer review /
independent review / self review /
code walkthrough.

External Quality Assurance

Competent associates external to
the project verify each work item
or deliverable.

Final Inspection

An external reviewer does the final
quality check to ensure
completeness and usability of the
package before delivering the final
product to the client. In addition,
the external reviewer periodically
verifies that the team is complying
with all quality process.
The Project Leader also does a final
inspection before delivery.

In addition, Project Management Reviews (PMR) are conducted every quarter by senior managers and project audits
are performed by to verify compliance with customer-specific processes and TCS iQMS.
Information Security and Data privacy
Information security and data privacy is critical to our business. In pursuit of the Company's Security

TCS Security Policy
TCS is a global leader in providing IT services, business solutions and outsourcing with business operations
spreading across continents. TCS services multiple customers through its GNDM(TM) model and as a part of its
operations has access to huge volumes of information (including personal information and IPR), impact on which
could be detrimental to TCS or its customers’ business interests.
Our Security Vision is “To make TCS reliable, resilient and immune to the existing and evolving volatile
environment of constant changes, accidents, attacks and failures, so as to enable all our stakeholders experience
certainty.”
This Security Policy reiterates our commitment to protect all the information assets that we own or are
responsible for; thus, ensuring an eﬃcient, safe and secure working environment for TCS and its customers.
TCS will deploy a convergent security model to ensure the following:
Protection to information assets against unauthorized access by deploying adequate security controls
covering physical, logical and personnel security
n Compliance to legal and statutory / regulatory requirements across its global operations
n Continuity of operations in line with business requirements and obligations to its stakeholders
n Inclusion of security responsibilities of various departments / individuals to adhere to this Policy
n Adequate security awareness and competence among associates at all levels to fulﬁll these responsibilities
n Avenues for associates and other stakeholders to report security weaknesses or violations
n A robust response framework to handle security weaknesses or violations
n Governance of security performance against appropriate targets and objectives, enabling continuous
improvements
n

26

This Policy would be supported by Security Standards, Procedures and Guidelines and made available to all
associates as TCS' Information Security Management System (ISMS). Every associate in TCS is expected to
contribute towards the eﬀective implementation and deployment of these security norms.
This ISMS will be periodically reviewed to ensure its continuing applicability and relevance to our operations
and evolving stakeholder expectations.
This Policy will extend to TCS and its wholly owned subsidiaries, and will be applicable to all its associates,
business associates and external parties having access and usage rights to its infrastructure, IT systems
and/or Information resources. Consequences arising out of violations or contravention to any of the
objectives of the ISMS will be equally applicable to all associates globally and external parties.
Vision, TCS has implemented a comprehensive Information Security Management System (ISMS) framework
based on the globally recognized ISO 27001:2005 ISMS standard, covering network controls, network privacy,
internet security, patch management system and controls against malicious software. Our Information
Security is managed by a team of security professionals having industry-recognized credentials such as the
CISA, CISM, CISSP, CEH, CBCP etc, and hailing from varied backgrounds and experience, such as application
development, Infrastructure services, Networking, Forensics, Legal and Compliance.
We consider all client information as confidential and have rigorous processes in place to protect the same.
Our security policy has been framed to comply with all international privacy laws and information security
laws as applicable. Collection, processing and dissemination of any personal data is done under highly
8
controlled conditions .
Investing in Innovation
Constant innovation is important for business sustainability, ensuring as it does, the continued relevancy of
the Company to its customer's needs. Innovation is an important part of the organizational DNA of TCS and a
key enabler of the 'Experience Certainty' proposition. The Company has well defined processes and a
framework to drive innovation across its diverse businesses.
A collaborative network
of stakeholders

Identification and
delivery of
customer value

Co-Innovation
Network (COINTM)
Customer
Value
Proposition

Technology
Market Map

Categorization of
initiatives timelines and
nature of impact

Innovation
@ TCS
Foster and nurture
Innovative culture
- People Processes

Innovation
Culture

Innovation
Themes

Direction and purpose of
innovation programs

Innovation
Life Cycle

Process for generation of ideas
and realization into business
Figure 6: Framework for driving innovation across TCS

TCS has established a strong organizational focus for innovation - the Corporate Technology Organization (CTO) –
which governs innovation processes, sets benchmarks, guides creation of Intellectual Property and facilitates
Innovation diffusion. Innovation is delivered through:
n
n
n

Structured Innovation Engine: TCS Innovation Labs
Innovation Ecosystem: Co-Innovation Network, (COIN)™
Culture of Innovation: Knowledge Portals, Awards and People Practices

Apart from bringing big benefits to customers, TCS has, in the last couple of years, created
over a hundred product patents and its innovative products have won several awards from industry.

8

No breach of customer privacy or loss of customer data was brought to our notice in FY 2014.

27

How

Disruptions
(Disruptive Innovation Radical)

Standard Methodologies
Six Sigma
Metrics and KPIs

Investments by TCS

TCS and Client joint
Innovation Lab TCS
Ecosystem

What

Transformations
(Sustaining Innovation Platform)

Productivity improvement
Product standardization
Centres of Excellence
D-7 Digital Dashboard

Technology Consumption
Management
IS Optimization of
applications
Advanced modelling and
simulation

Leverage Innovation
Ecosystem
Enterprise Architecture
Domain & Technology
Next Generation Development
Utility Computing, ‘IT Plan’
Management

Who

Continuous Improvement
(Sustaining Innovation Derivative)

Engagement Team with
Support from Practices
and CoEs

Engagement Team with +
CTO Organization
(Practices and R & D)

TCS CTO Organization,
TCS Innovation Network

Figure 7: An Overview of TCS' innovation effort

TCS R&D continues to attract top research talent from India and across the world. The Company continues to
support sabbaticals, internships and PhD sponsorships in research areas relevant to the Company, in premier
academic institutions. Research based competencies have been introduced in the Company's learning portal.
Details of the Company's R&D focus areas and innovations are provided on Pages 29-30 and 33 of our Annual
Report. As of March 31, 2014, the company has applied for 1,746 patents of which 114 have been granted. TCS'
R&D expenses increased in FY 2014, in absolute terms as well as a percentage of revenue. The R&D centers at
Pune, Chennai, Bengaluru, Delhi- NCR, Hyderabad, Kolkata and Mumbai have been recognized by the GoI's
Department of Scientific & Industrial Research (DSIR). The Company has also set up innovation labs, product
engineering groups and groups engaged in path-breaking technologies at multiple locations all over the world.
Expenditure incurred in the Company's R&D centers during FY 2014, excluding expenses incurred by Innovation
Centers and by individual business units investing in building frameworks, products, platforms and other
intellectual property, went up 10.5% YoY as can be seen below:
FY 2013-14 ($ Mn)
R&D Expenses

32.7

FY 2012-13 ($ Mn)
29.6

% Increase
10.5 %

Structured for Agility
A key concern that sustained growth engenders is the potential loss of agility in an organization that has
outgrown its structure. Another concern is around whether and how the organization will be able to focus
on the right sectors for future growth.
Both these concerns are addressed by TCS’ organization structure which is designed to enhance customer
focus, accountability and agility. TCS is organized into many small operational units, each with 4,00015,000 employees, aligned to the different industry verticals. Each market-facing Business Unit owns its
resources and pursues growth in its respective domain at the best possible pace that the domain can
support, with all the agility and focus of a smaller company (See Figure 8).

28

CEO & Managing Director
R&D

Major
Markets

Corporate
HR

Corporate
Finance

Corporate
Affairs

Industry Solutions Units

Marketing

New
Growth
Markets

Legal

Strategic
Initiatives

Organizational infrastructure
Figure 8: Organization Structure designed for agility

Brand Building
The Company continued to implement global marketing initiatives to promote the TCS brand. All our marketing
communications – including advertising, promotions and sponsorships – tend to be understated, designed to
strengthen the trust our clients repose in us when they outsource the development and upkeep of key missioncritical systems to us, along with other key attributes they most appreciate in our work: high quality, reliability and
dependability . Our tagline, “Experience Certainty” captures the essence of these attributes.
TCS evaluates the health of the corporate brand at regular intervals in select markets. The evaluation is
benchmarked against a pre-defined competitive set, and along specific image and personality parameters that
include attributes such as 'ethical' and 'trustworthy'. The Company's marketing and communications strategy is
fine-tuned based on findings from this brand survey.
TCS participated in leading industry and business events around the world and held key customer summits worldwide reaffirming its commitment to delivering a complete brand and organizational experience. The Company
ensures that all marketing communication abides with the Tata Code of Conduct.
Apart from its regular branding activities, TCS also continues to invest in building the brand in the digital space
using premium business and technology channels as well through focused branded properties and sponsorships.
These include events and activities in sports such as motor sports, cricket, marathons and distance running
events. Lastly, TCS continued to articulate the brand promise internally using the various channels and internal
marketing assets and leveraged them to activate the brand amongst the associates as well as our other important
stake holders.

Being in the IT services domain, TCS does not sell products or services which are hazardous or banned in any market

29

Some of TCS' sponsorships in FY 2014 are as below:
TCS is the technology partner of the Rajasthan Royals, the Jaipur franchise
cricket team in the Indian Premier League. TCS provides IT expertise to help
the team analyze the players' performance, simulation and other areas. In
turn, TCS enjoys greater visibility among cricketing fans, with the RR players
sporting the TCS logo.

To reinforce TCS' brand attribute of commitment to excellence,
we sponsor various marathons across the world in order to
support the commitment to excellence of the participants.
These sponsorships also serve to reinforce our commitment
to wellness, because they give us an opportunity to engage with
runners, their friends and family, and the broader community
to drive home the importance of fitness and health. In FY 2014,
major marathons sponsored by TCS were:
n
n
n
n
n
n
n

Standard Chartered Mumbai Marathon
World 10K Bangalore
Boston Marathon
Bank of America Chicago Marathon
ING New York City Marathon
TCS Amsterdam Marathon
BMW Berlin Marathon

TCS IT Wiz, India's biggest inter- school IT Quiz programme, started in
1999 as a part of the educational Initiative to help build awareness
about technology and provide a window to the world of Information
Technology for young students. In 2011 TCS launched the first
international edition in UAE.
TCS IT Wiz is a knowledge platform currently held in 14 cities across
Indian and has become a national benchmark in the inter-school
quizzing circuit for the level of research, the intensity with which teams
compete and the sheer participation number it draws. TCS IT Wiz
provides a wider outlook to the students about Information Technology
and its trends as in the current global scenario; IT plays an integral role in
the knowledge economy and is a key enabler for success in diverse fields.
The platform provides an opportunity to learn outside the classroom,
fosters competitive spirit amongst students and triggers voluntary
learning, and to prepare them for the future.

Sustainability in Marketing
Being a services company catering to a purely B2B market, sustainability issues such as the environmental, health
and safety impacts of products and software solutions have limited relevance and hence are not directly
applicable.
Likewise, product labeling requirements do not apply to our business. Documentation of the custom applications
we build for clients is as per mutually agreed specifications. System documentation is not governed by any
regulation or industry code. All our marketing communications including advertising, promotions and
sponsorships comply with the relevant laws of the countries that we operate in. No instance of regulatory noncompliance in this area was brought to our attention in FY 2014.
The related issue of sustainable consumption also does not arise because our clients are sophisticated consumers
– mostly large Global 2000 corporations that consume our services rationally, in accordance with their business
requirements, staying within the vendor concentration limits specified by their risk oversight policies.

30

Financial Sustainability
Successful execution of our strategy for sustainable growth requires investments in building capacity, in people
and in new business initiatives. TCS' business model has a financial profile characterized by strong cash
generation, low capital needs, low working capital requirements, negligible debt and very attractive Return on
Equity. TCS is a near zero-debt company, funding its growth entirely through internal accruals. We did not receive
any significant governmental financial assistance in FY 20149.
These are structural attributes of our business model, and are sustainable. Equally important, we have a robust risk
management framework using which we scan the environment for potential risks to this sustainability and take
mitigative steps.
Strong cash flows
The Company's growth is financed by cash generated from operations. As of March 31, 2014, Total Shareholder's
Equity stood at $9,213 Mn (FY13: $7,537 Mn) of which Retained Earnings made up $10,289 Mn (FY13: $8,025 Mn).
As at March 31, 2014, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $245 Mn (FY13: $339 Mn) and Bank Deposits
of $2,406 Mn (FY13: $1,361 Mn). Net Cash generated from Operations was $2,613 Mn (FY13: $2,266 Mn).
The Company believes that it has sufficient cash from operations to meet its working capital requirements. In
addition it has short term working capital facilities with various commercial banks.
Shareholder Value delivered, year after year
In FY 2014, the Company paid a total dividend of $0.5 (`32) i.e. a payout ratio of 37% of the consolidated profits
under IFRS.
TCS' market capitalization as of March 31, 2014 was $70 Bn.

Our Sustainability Services

TCS Eco-Sustainability Services
Information Technology has a big role to play in driving the sustainability agenda for our customers.
TCS offers IT-led services in the 4 key areas/
Sustainability Performance Mgmt

Life Cycle Assessments

Energy Management

Product & Package Materials

Water & Waste Management

DfE and PLM Integration

Green IT

Low Carbon Logistics

Strategy
& Risk

Operations

Products
& Services

Consumer
Influence

To create significant
impact, organizations need
to consider the
environmental efficiencies
in their entire value chain.
The internal operations
and business processes of
an organization may only
contribute a fraction of the
ecological impact of the
entire value chain, as
compared to the other
components of the value
chain such as raw materials
procurement, their
manufacturing and
processing, shipping
and transportation,
use and disposal.

TCS continues to invest in
building capabilities on
the key aspects of the
entire value chain to
create significant
sustainability impact, and
help its clients drive their
sustainability agenda
effectively and efficiently.

TCS differentiates itself as
a trusted partner helping
clients drive the
sustainability agenda
through the thought
leadership in this space,
ability to innovate and cocreate solutions, rich
sustainability and
industry domain
expertise and an
established partnership
ecosystem to provide the
end-to-end solutions

Driven by the cost and
scarcity of resources,
rapidly changing country
and industry regulations,
transformation in the
competitive landscape,
and increasing investor
interest, boardrooms and
chief executives recognize
that sustainability is
important
for the future success
of their business

Reporting & Disclosure
Compliance Management
Supplier Risk Management

Social Media Analytics
Product Info Through Mobile Apps
Smart Homes/Smart Meters

31

Detailed view of
TCS Eco-sustainability services
Reporting & Disclosures
Develop a robust data model to support the sustaibility processes and management procedures,
leveraging our “ecoBIDS” framework to meet customers eﬀorts toward voluntary disclosures

Strategy
& Risk

Compliance Management
TCS supports client with compliance process blue-printing, EHS systems implementation,
as well as in creating, verifying and submitting necessary documentation associated with
the key regulations such as RoHS, REACH, etc.
Supplier Risk Assessments
TCS helps design, deploy, or enhance existing system(s) to monitor supplier sustainability
performance and risks periodically. We also have frameworks to proﬁle and rank suppliers,
and identify diﬀerent sourcing options.
Eco-footprinting/baselining
Deploying “ECView” to baseline an oranization’s GHG Emissions under Scope 1, 2 and 3 in line
with the ISO 14064-1:2006 standard
Energy Management
TCS helps design and deploy an integrated energy management platform that covers all type of
facilities and energy sources across the enterprise operations.

Operations

Renewable Energy
TCS support organizations to arrive at an optimal energy mix, considering the relevant policies and
technology maturity of alternative energy resources.
Water & Waste Management | Sustainability Performance Management
We help Select, design and implement an integrated management platform on proprietary or
COTS or bespoke software to track, and monetize enterprise performance across energy, water,
waste, and carbon dimensions
Green IT/Data Centers
As part of our larger IT infrastructure transformation framework, ‘itransform’ our ‘PowerInsight’ tool
provides real-time information about the power consumption of both the IT and the non-IT
(cooling and lighting) components in a data centre
LCAs for Eco Labeling & EPD
TCS Facilitates sustainability information disclosure for products for voluntary disclosure
requirements such as eco-labels to comply with enviornmental declarations and
reporting frameworks

Products
& Services

Product & Package optimization | Sustainable materials
TCS helps model and understand the possible impacts of interventions across the product and
package composition towards product weight and material optimization, migration to more
sustainable sources.
Integration of DfE with PLM | Digital Manufacturing
TCS helps future-proof new product development by integrating DfE principles in product design
Low Carbon Logistics
TCS can help improve network throughput with an innovative application of pull-based process
design and Theory of Constraints(ToCs) solution
Smart Meters/Smart Energy
Our Smart Integration framework merges diverse utility applications like customer portals,
billing system, Meter Data Management System(MDMS), Outage Management System (OMS),
work & asset management systems.

Consumer
Inﬂuence

Product Information through Mobile Applications
Dedicated Mobile UX Design team, comprising user experience designers, and user researchers
help identify best means to share your product’s sustainability benef its.
Social Media Analytics
Through our social business solutions, engage, listen, analyze and respond to customers on
diﬀerent social channels

32

Our Workforce
Human capital is the largest factor in our business and the sustainability of revenue growth is directly dependent
on the organization's ability to attract and retain the right talent in the right quantity.
TCS has a highly educated workforce, whose technical skills are greatly valued globally. Although employment is
at will with one month's notice period from either side for termination, employees have significantly higher
bargaining power in this industry, ensuring workers' interests are largely protected by the free market and less
than 0.055% of the workforce is unionized in India, which is our largest region of operation.
TCS recognizes the criticality of human capital to the business and its sustainability, and has in place mature
processes devoted to attracting, retaining and developing this human capital, assessed at PCMM Level 5.
The total number of permanent employees* including subsidiaries as at March 31, 2014 was 3,00,464 (End-FY13:
2,76,196). It is a predominantly young workforce, with an average age of ~28.7 years. A break up of the permanent
workforce by employee category and age is given below:
4% 0%
22%

29%

Middle Level, Male
Middle Level, Female
Junior Level, Male
Junior Level, Female
Senior Level, Male
Senior Level, Female

34%

10%
Figure 9A: Break up of workforce by category

1%
4%

1%

0.3%

7%

Middle Level, Male
23%

< 30 Yrs, Female
39%

30-40 Yrs, Male
30-40 Yrs, Female
40-50 Yrs, Male
40-50 Yrs, Female
> 50 Yrs, Male
> 50 Yrs, Female

25%

Figure 9B: Breakup of workforce by age

*TCS does not have part time employees on the payroll.

33

Additionally, during FY14, TCS workforce on temporary basis comprised 20,741 individuals.
28%

Male
72%

Female

Figure 10: Breakup of temporary workforce

Diversifying the talent pool
With custom-tailored training programs and greater gender as well as cross-cultural sensitization, TCS has been
able to expand the talent pool from which to recruit, in terms of gender, geography and academic discipline.
TCS is an Equal Opportunity Employer and subscribes to the Tata Code of Conduct in embracing diversity in race,
nationality, religion, ancestry, marital status, gender, age, ethnic origin, physical ability and sexual orientation.
Compensation levels are merit-based, determined by qualification, experience levels, special-skills if any and
performance. Gender and any of the other diversity parameters don't play any part in determining compensation
levels. TCS has a well-defined Diversity & Inclusion Policy.
The Company participates in the Tata group's Second Career initiative which offers job opportunities to women
returning to the workplace after a break in their careers. We also have an initiative called DAWN (Diversity and
Women's Network), a support group for women and minorities, that fosters inclusivity through collaborative
dialog. DAWN organizes leadership-connects, mentoring, discussion forums, sensitization workshops, wellness
sessions and reorientation programs for associates returning to the workplace after long-leave. 'Culture Meter'
aims to build appreciation in the workforce for different cultures and practices across the globe through mailers,
quizzes and other online resources.
As at March 31, 2014, women constituted 32.7 % (Consolidated) of TCS' workforce. The number of non-Indian
nationals in our workforce stood at 27,510 (including subsidiaries), representing 118 different nationalities
(FY 2013: 118 nationalities). The breakup by nationality is provided in Figure 11.
Composition of International Workforce - TCS Consolidated
24.7%

Indians
British

Others
14.1%
12.5%

Chilean
Filipinos
Ecuadorian

90.8%

4.3%

9.2%

Uruguayan
Columbian

6.4%

Chinese
American

7.8%

14.4%
7.3%

4.8%

Mexican
Others

Figure 11: Break up of non-Indian workforce by nationality

Talent Acquisition
The Company continues to attract high quality talent and has been able to successfully scale up the talent
acquisition process. The global workforce plan is structured in alignment with the short, medium and long term
business plans. The consolidated requirements are part-fulfilled by re-skilling / up-skilling existing unallocated
associates and the balance fulfilled through focused drives by the Talent Acquisition Group. Experienced
professionals are recruited through online jobsites, head-hunters, recruitment agencies and through employee
reference schemes. Other sources of experienced talent include strategic initiatives like M&A and in-sourcing.
The Company's talent acquisition strategy is strongly focused on Campus Recruitment of engineering graduates
and has invested in building relationships with universities across the world, as well as improving the quality of
academic training at engineering colleges. In FY 2014, TCS (including subsidiaries) recruited 61,200 employees, on
a gross basis (FY 2013: 69,728). Of this, 22,718 i.e. 37% of the gross hires were fresh graduates.
34

78.3%

10.3%

India
Other
Emerging Markets
4.7%

21.7

North America
Europe

0.6%

APAC

1.1%

UK&I

5.0%

Figure 12: Breakup of new employee hires by region

30.6%
3.8%

Male < 30 Yrs
Female < 30Yrs
2.2%

Male 30-40 Yrs
Female 30-40 Yrs

20.8%

1.2%
0.6%
0.4%

Male 40-50 Yrs
Male > 50 Yrs
Female 40-50 Yrs
Female > 50 Yrs

12.5%
48.6%
Figure 13: Breakup of new employee hires by gender and age

The Academic Interface Program (AIP) helps build a robust high-quality, long-term relationship between the
Company and Academic Institutions

Faculty Development Programs: TCS’ senior
associates conduct training programs for
faculty, to keep them abreast with technology,
developments and an industry perspective.

Student Workshops: Sessions for students
on technical, managerial or soft-skills topics
to enhance competitiveness and
workplace-readiness

Memebership in Boards of Studies(BOS) /
Curriculum Commitees: TCS representatives
participate in Curriculum Committees or BOS
of select academic institutes, to help shape
the curricula and make it industry-oriente.

Project Support and Internships:
TCS provides internship
opportunities for students from
Indian and overseas institutions

Student Awards: Sponsors the
Best Student and the Best
Student Project awards.

Sponsorship of Academic
Technical Events in closed
partner institutes.

Campus Commune
TCS has created a professional networking platform for campus recruits to connect, share, explore and collaborate
with their peers and TCS associates prior to joining the Company. Campus Commune aims to engage the campus
community and sustain an interest in a career at TCS. The platform provides users with timely information and
updates about the Company, Initial Learning Program (ILP), applicable processes and other pertinent topics of
interest.
35

TCS also plays a role in mentoring and guiding students to explore career opportunities within the
Company by way of experience sharing, discussions, awareness building on relevant industry trends,
engaging through debates, polls and other engagement practices and pertinent topics of interest.
The Company continues to actively attract young talent through innovative platforms.
CodeVita was launched in 2012 to provide a platform for Coding Enthusiasts in technical colleges to
showcase their programming skills. Code Vita 2013, the second season of this contest, was a huge success
with over 1,30,000 registrations across colleges in India. Code Vita has also been a wonderful opportunity
for TCS to spot the brightest programming talent in the academia and attract them into TCS.
ASPIRE is a mandatory online and interactive program for technical graduates. The program aims to
prepare students who have been offered jobs at TCS for the ILP, ensure that they learn the basic concepts
of IT, get to know more about the Company and sharpen their communication skills. The Aspire modules
are deployed online in an interactive and gamified manner, reaching more than 20,000 students.
Ignite – from Science to Software
The Ignite program is a pioneering initiative to induct science graduates to TCS. Ignite has trained 1025
associates during FY 2014. These associates were selected from a talent pool of 120,000 Science graduates
from 500 high potential colleges across 400 districts across India.
The technology-enabled, project based learning approach at Ignite evolves continuously leading to the
development of innovative digital assets.
Local Recruitment outside India
TCS is a multinational company with operations in 46 countries. Local recruitment is an integral part of our
staffing strategy in each of these countries, spanning every level in the local organization. In FY 2014, TCS
at a consolidated level recruited 14,320 employees outside India. The percentage of senior-level
employees amongst local recruits was 5% at the TCS group level (FY 2013: 5.3%).
Fresher recruitment is facilitated by the relationships built up with empanelled universities through our
Academic Interface Programs in different parts of the world. The brand awareness created by those
programs helps attract quality talent when we formally participate in their placement programs and
conduct on-campus interviews. Recruitment of experienced professionals is done through our
empanelled recruitment agencies and head-hunters.
Local Subcontractors
A key element of the manpower demand fulfillment strategy is the need-based use of contractors,
especially for assignments which are of a short-term nature or which require skills not readily available or
in sufficient numbers internally. For this purpose, TCS maintains strong relationships with a network of
empanelled vendors – staffing agencies and head-hunters – in every country that we operate in. We tap
into this network to find suitable candidates whenever the need arises. In case those skills are needed on a
longer term basis, TCS looks to build equivalent capabilities internally and eventually replace these
contractors with employees. In FY 2014, TCS spent $883 Mn (6.6% of Rev) on subcontractors (FY13: $638
Mn, 6.0% of Rev).
Learning & Development
TCS' Integrated Competency And Management System enables systematic tracking of the training
roadmap of the Company's large workforce, while integrating skill assessment and individual
development and providing employees an end-to-end view of their learning and competency
development needs, as well as their progress against the plan.
At the start of the year, every employee in consultation with her/his supervisor, works out a learning and
development plan for the year, based on their interests and aspirations as well as the needs of the specific
project / Business Unit. Thereafter, the employee goes through various training sessions and workshops as
outlined in the plan. These could be through e-learning sessions on our in-house Learning Management
System, external certifications, classroom sessions conducted by various technical centers of excellence
within TCS or Management Development Programs (MDPs). Each associate is assessed biannually on the
progress made against this plan.

Category
Senior management

36

Average per capita training hours in FY 2014
Male
23.3

Female
29.0

Middle management

36.4

41.9

Junior management

91.0

99.4

Others/N/A

30.1

29.5

In FY 2014, overall 3,152,707 learning days were invested towards competency development including training in
thrust technology areas. The breakup of this is as below:
1.4%

6%

9.7%

Senior
83.0%

Middle
Junior
Other

Figure 14: Breakup of learning days by employee category

Of this, some 239,130 learning days went into developing management skills and leadership qualities amongst
employees identified for managerial and leadership roles.
Training programs at the entry level as well as the continuous learning programs that cover technology, domain
and project management practices have been enhanced during the year to ensure that TCS develops the right
competencies in its workforce that can deliver and meet customers' business needs. This process, in turn, helps
individuals drive growth in their careers and realize their potential in different ways.
TCS places significant emphasis on training and grooming employees at all levels with a long term perspective
that develops the right competencies which help individuals drive growth in their careers and realize their
potential in different ways to support their continued employment and post retirement phase. In addition, HR
also organizes multiple programs on financial management, health and other areas that assist them in managing
career endings.

Talent Retention
TCS views talent retention as another critical success factor – as important as talent acquisition – and has invested
heavily in building an employee-friendly culture and developing mature people-processes towards improving it.
We have been assessed enterprise wide at PCMM Level 5 and our retention programs are considered best-in-class
in the industry. Employee retention has been enhanced through a wide range of competency enhancement and
career growth options, role mobility, challenging assignments, competitive and differential compensation, flexible
working hours, a collaborative work environment, rewards, recognition and benefits.
The outcomes of these retention programs have also been best in class. The return to work and retention rates
after parental leave are at 70%. Although the majority of parental leave was taken by female associates, adoption
leave was opted for primarily by male associates. In FY14, 10 out of the 16 employees who opted for adoption
leave were men. Our attrition figures have historically been, and continue to be, the lowest in the industry. In
FY 2014, attrition in IT Services was 10.4% (on a LTM basis) while overall attrition, including BPO, stood at 11.3%.
Of this, attrition caused by departures of new hires within the same year was 2.9%. Of total attrition, female
employee attrition was 35.3 %. Attrition levels are higher at junior levels – at 12.5%.

35.3%
16.4%
12.2%

9.4%
64.7%
9.0%

<30

30-39

40-49

Figure 15: Break up of departures by age
(out of employee base in age group)

>50 yrs

Male

Female

Figure 16: Breakup of departures by
gender (out of total attrition)

37

40.0%
33.5%

33.4%

35.0%

28.9%

30.0%

26.3%

26.9%

25.0%

24.1% 24.2%

20.0%
15.0%
9.8%

10.0%
5.0%
0.0%
APAC

LATAM

Middle East

Africa

EUR

UK

NA

INDIA

Figure 17: Breakup of departures by region
Career Development
Career Management Process operates with the philosophy of facilitating employee's Career Growth in TCS.
CareerHub provides a framework to help employees learn and grow. It operates in a dynamic manner to
provide timely updates to fuel and fast pace employees' career in the organization.
An integral part of the CareerHub is Inspire - TCS Hi Potential Program (HiPo) and CareerHub process. The
'Inspire Program' aims at identification, engagement and building of a robust leadership pipeline, keeping
in line with the organizational growth objectives. Under this program special initiatives are taken for hi
potential employees (in senior and middle grades) at the ISU and organizational level to bring about more
visibility to the high potential employee in terms of positioning, allocations, projects and learning. HiPo's
undergo exclusive focused leadership programs to help them move into higher roles. The CareerHub
Process is for all other employees in middle to senior management and equivalent grades. It is a
competency based approach with emphasis on experiential learning. In both these processes mentees
have career discussion with their chosen mentor and customized Individual Development Plan is created
by mentor post discussion.
At TCS, career processes are online and transparent, with a holistic view of aspirations, mentoring, and
developmental interventions, as well as an opportunity to share their feedback online. My Career Eureka is
a social media platform for associates to connect for insights and plan their careers in TCS. In this
community, associates have a common ground to blog, discuss, clarify and develop a better
understanding about their careers as well as to connect with domain experts.
Employees can voice their views and inputs on the career processes through the Career Eureka
community on the internal social networking platform. This community launched in late 2013, has been
successful in responding to associates' queries in real time, sharing inspirational success stories of midlevel and senior associates, and also for receiving guidance through a one-to-many mentoring
opportunity. The community is also used to crowd-source ideas and use this platform to constantly
develop and improvise on our career planning tools.
Competitive Compensation Model
TCS has to attract and retain talent in a highly competitive labor market. The workforce consists of mainly
software engineers who hold engineering graduate and post-graduate degrees and even entry-level
wages of engineers in any country tend to be several times higher than the minimum wage in that
country. Our employee cost over the last three years is given below:

Employee Costs in USD Mn

38

FY 2012

FY 2013

FY 2014

5,654

6,549

7,544

To ensure competitiveness in the pursuit of talent, TCS regularly benchmarks its compensation plans and
benefits with those offered by peers to ensure that competitiveness. There is also a skill-based allowance for
employees possessing niche skills, designed to motivate employees to acquire marketable skills thereby
benefiting themselves as well as the company.
Compensation structures are driven by prevailing practices in the different countries we operate in. But across the
enterprise, remuneration is the same for men and women working at the same location and in the same grade.
In India, in addition to a fixed component of the salary, there is a variable component linked to the Economic
Value Added (EVA). Payout of that component depends on organizational performance as well as individual
performance. This alignment of the Company's interests and the individual's interests has the effect of
strengthening team spirit and improving collaboration amongst teams.
Reward and Recognition
Subscribing to a performance based culture, TCS has several schemes for recognizing and rewarding employees.
TCS Gems is the formal, global online employee recognition platform for managing all the rewarding mechanisms
at TCS. Some of the popular awards are Star of the Month and Quarter Awards, On the Spot Award, Best Program
and Project Manager Awards, Star Team Award, Beyond Performance Award, Service Awards, appreciation
certificates. Associates can choose their reward from a variety of redemption options ranging from electronic
items, utility products, gift vouchers, travel accessories, charity and more.
Other forms of rewarding outstanding performance include fast-track promotions, sponsorship of external
training and certification programs, assignment to key positions, membership to professional bodies, sponsorship
to international conferences, public announcements of individual/team achievements on the intranet, internal
magazines, town hall meetings and so on.
Challenging Assignments
The importance of work content and an individual's quest for self-actualization can never be overstated. By virtue
of its broad footprint across geographies, across industries and appetite for executing large complex projects, TCS
offers plenty of opportunities for ambitious individuals who seek challenging assignments and exposure to
different kinds of roles, technologies and geographies. This has been an important aspect of TCS' best-in-class
ability to retain high performers.
Employee engagement and motivation
Communication within TCS has moved to the next level thanks to Knome, TCS's internal social networking portal.
From the traditional one-dimensional mode of communicating to multi-dimensional engagement, the
organization caters to its largely young audience through this social network. TCS associates across the globe can
now post their views, suggestions and questions at one place, and also expect to get feedback through
comments and answers from other associates. TCS' senior leadership engage regularly with associates through
blogs and live chat sessions, which has ensured that that the voice of a regular associate is not just heard, but
'actioned' upon by the top management.
Besides, the simplification journey within TCS will usher in an era where employees will get their work done faster,
in a more efficient way through effective and easier processes.
Employee retention and motivation are greatly facilitated through closer engagement with employees and by
fostering a spirit of community, through shared activities outside of work. TCS sponsors picnics and social
gatherings at every location so employees and their families get together under informal settings. Another forum
for employees and their families to participate in and develop sense of camaraderie is TCS Maitree, which
harnesses their energy and enthusiasm to undertake activities for the betterment of the local communities and
the environment.
TCS takes an active interest in the wellbeing of employees and has actively supported athletic and sporting events
at the national, regional and local level. The company encourages employees to participate in these activities on a
regular basis and stay fit. On TCS campuses, the focus on a culture of fitness translates into a myriad of activities,
from yoga to aerobics; from tennis and badminton coaching to cricket and football tournaments.
Initiatives like TCS Fit4Life and Purpose4Life have enthused employees to take care of their fitness, and in giving
back to the society respectively. The company encourages associates to participate in these initiatives by forming
teams, and 'gamification' done through their respective portals. Through Fit4Life, TCS' CEO himself encourages
employees to form teams and pursue a passion for running. TCS' sponsorship of the Mumbai Marathon, the
World 10K Bangalore and other long-distance events across the world has sparked widespread interest in fitness
and running.

10 TCS offers gratuity, a defined benefit retirement plan for eligible employees in India and in certain overseas locations. The plan provides for
a lump sum payment to vested employees at retirement, death while in employment or on termination of employment. Total benefit
obligation at the end of FY2014 stood at $246.6 Mn.
11 Remuneration for men and women at the same location and grade is in the ratio 1:1

39

Commitment to Human Rights
A strong commitment to human rights is an integral part of the Tata Code of Conduct. The policy is applicable to TCS,
its subsidiaries and vendors. The Company's commitment to follow the basic principles of human rights is reﬂected in
the checks and balances and grievance redressal systems within the HR processes. The Company does not carry out
formal human rights reviews or impact assessments.
The commitment to human rights is embedded in the 'Tata Code of Conduct', adopted by the Company. All
employees, including security personnel, are sensitized to human rights as part of their orientation program.
With respect to vendors, TCS follows a rigorous screening process before entering into a business relationship. All the
contracts that we enter into with vendors require the vendor to comply with the relevant laws safeguarding labor
rights and human rights in their respective jurisdiction.
No incident of discrimination or non-compliance with relevant labor laws by any of our business partners was
brought to our notice in FY 2014. As on March 31st 2014, all pending grievances relating to human rights were
addressed and resolved.

Employee Wellness and Safety
Health and Wellness
TCS takes an active interest in the wellbeing of employees and has actively supported athletic and sporting events
at the national, regional and local level. The company encourages employees to participate in these activities on a
regular basis and stay ﬁt. On TCS campuses, the focus on a culture of ﬁtness translates into a myriad of activities,
from yoga to aerobics; from tennis and badminton coaching to cricket and football tournaments.
Initiatives like TCS Fit4Life and Purpose4Life have enthused employees to take care of
their ﬁtness, and in giving back to the society respectively. The company encourages
associates to participate in these initiatives by forming teams, and 'gamiﬁcation'
done through their respective portals.
Through Fit4Life, TCS' CEO himself encourages employees to form teams and pursue
a passion for running. TCS' sponsorship of the Mumbai Marathon, the World 10K
Bangalore and other long-distance events across the world has sparked widespread
interest in ﬁtness and running. Associates are encouraged to make an annual
commitment of ﬁtness hours on our ﬁtness portal.
Similarly, Purpose4Life is aimed at ensuring mental and social well-being of employees. It is designed to motivate
and enable TCS' associates to contribute towards societal well-being by providing a platform that could channelise
the eﬀort and leverage the extensive geographical reach. As part of this initiative, each TCS associate is
encouraged to commit a minimum of 10 hours in a year towards activities that would be based on TCS' CSR
themes of Education, Health and Environment.
Case Study on Health and Wellbeing
TCS UK launched 2 employee wellbeing programs - “Healthier Me in Q3” and “Know you’re Score in Q4”.
Both these quarterly campaigns focused on physical and mental wellbeing, engaging employees by providing
activities, information and access to support on a variety of wellbeing subjects.

Good
mental
health

Good
Physical
health

Wellbeing

The campaigns launched a focus on mental wellbeing, in an effort to raise awareness on the causes of stress
and offer self-help measures to identify and reduce common stressors. Employees were offered the
opportunity to undertake a wellbeing self-assessment. One to one stress and lifestyles consultations, on site
massages, de-stressing mind and body workshops as well as nutritional information and advice as a natural
remedy to help control stress were provided.

40

The second aspect of the campaigns focused on physical wellbeing to include seasonal health, personal
fitness, cardiovascular health and smoking cessation. Local health clubs and complementary gym and
swimming passes were introduced at a number of locations. TCS supported the British Heart Foundation
national campaign to raise awareness of heart disease across the UK and held competitions “ramp up the
red” to encourage participation.
In addition, mini health screening sessions at a number of offices were offered, to include BP &
cholesterol checks with instant results enabling follow up recommendations and advice as applicable,
alongside a nutritional workshops offering advice on healthy eating. The initiative concluded with a
smoking cessation program, encouraging people to quit smoking forming a chain of abstinence across
our offices.

12 Full text of TCS' Occupational Health and Safety Policy is available on the TCS website. The URL is:
http://www.tcs.com/about/corp_responsibility/health-safety-policy/Pages/default.aspx

41

Occupational Health & Safety
TCS' workforce is its key asset and knowledge bank. The need is to drive safety as a culture within the organization so
that Safety First becomes the TCSers way of life. TCS' commitment to provide a healthy and safe work environment to
all associates and partners on TCS premises is articulated in the organization's Occupational Health & Safety (OHS)
Policy which translates into the objectives and targets towards inculcating safe behavior.

Occupational Health & Safety Objectives and Targets
Objectives

Goals

Target

Building a safety culture and
inculcating safe work
practices among associate
and contractors

Providing training for associates
and contractors

1 hour per associate per year
2 hours per contract staff per year

Creating general awareness

1 awareness communication per month
1 awareness campaign per quarter

Providing safe workplaces
and compliance to H&S
management system &
regulatory requirements
Incident Reporting and
implementation of remedial
measures

H&S inspections for all the Sites

One annual inspection per site

Compliance to H&S legal and
HSE-MS requirements

100%

Reporting of accidents and near
miss incidents

Increase in number of reporting

Resolution of incidents reported
and effectiveness of measures

100%

TCS has an integrated management system including an occupations health and safety management system as per
OHSAS 18001:2007 standard. This forms the bedrock towards driving OHS as an integral part of the roles and
responsibilities of each stakeholder across the organization. TCS has enterprise wide certiﬁcation from an external
certiﬁcation agency (TUV-Nord) for 96 facilities (including 22 overseas facilities) and is committed to include more
locations under the certiﬁcation in a phased manner. All facilities located in various geographies track and comply
with all local legal and statutory requirements related to occupational health and safety and strive for 'beyond
compliance' leadership.
The cross-functional Corporate Sustainability Council is responsible for outlining strategies and deploying OHS
improvement initiatives across the organization and the Board-level Health, Safety and Sustainability committee
reviews to ensure governance. To ensure centre-level focus, each certiﬁed location has a HSE committee, appointed
and chaired by the Centre Head. This cross-functional team oversees the deployment of HSE processes and initiatives,
monitors the performance and spearheads the continual improvement plans for that center.
The key generic H&S risks which have been identiﬁed as typical to TCS' nature of operations include ergonomic risks
arising due to computer usage, indoor air quality & ﬁre risk typical to an oﬃce building and general oﬃce risks
including slips, trips, falls, electrical shock, etc. Hazard identiﬁcation and risk assessment has helped identify each
such risk and ensure that proper mitigation measures are put in place to create a healthy and safe work environment.
Some of the mitigation measures include provision of ergonomically designed chairs and workstations, low radiation
computer monitors, monitoring of indoor air quality, periodic cleaning of HVAC ducting to avoid sick building
syndrome. In addition, the measures include ﬁre detection, alarm and suppression systems, regular inspections and
audits to review safety preparedness, mock drills, safety training and employee engagement campaigns on safety.
Other proactive initiatives on health and wellness include periodic camps for medical checks, visits by doctors, ﬁrst
aid facilities, Fit4Life campaign, employee assistance program and counselors for stress management. The risks
related to contractor activities in the facility are addressed through engineering and administrative controls, use of
Personal Protective Equipments (PPEs) and training, as appropriate.
Training and engagement is an important element for safety awareness. Health and safety training is imparted to
associates as a part of the induction module at the time of joining to achieve minimum mandatory H&S competence
combined with an annual refresher web based HSE training. Knome, the social network of TCS, has emerged as a
strong platform to engage the Gen Y TCSers on safety topics. Additionally, several awareness campaigns are

42

conducted to reach out to associates like Road Safety, Fire Safety, Ergonomics, Behavior based safety, etc. In FY
2014, over 380,000 man-hours of training through classroom sessions, induction trainings and web based
training on Health, Safety and Environment have been imparted.
TCS is also proactively monitoring safety practices at all the new facilities coming up at various locations across
India. Deployment of safety processes and systems is mandated with eﬀective tracking of lead as well as lag
safety indicators in order to maintain a comprehensive oversight of safety performance.
Injury Data
Typical to any service sector company operating in oﬃce-based premises, the most common injuries within TCS
premises occur due to slips, trips and falls or being struck by stationary objects, etc. The focus is on capturing all
types of incidents including accidents, near-misses and safety observations and ensuring 100% closure of the
reported incidents with appropriate corrective and preventive actions.

Lost Time Injury Frequency Rate

0.10

0.08
0.05

0.05

0.05
0.03

0.05
0.02
0.00
2008-09

2009-10

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

Figure 18: Lost Time Injury Frequency Rate

Figure 18 Lost Time Injury Frequency Rate (LTIFR) - number of lost time injuries per million man-hours worked
(TCS associates + contract staﬀ working in TCS oﬃces).
Occupational Health & Safety Campaigns
In order to inculcate a safety culture in the organization and emphasize that “Safety is everyone's responsibility”,
we continue to engage with associates on ﬁre safety, road safety, ergonomics, electrical hazards, slip trips and
falls. Activities include innovative ground-level and online activities, competitions for TCS associates and contract
staﬀ, educative information-based mailers and ﬂoor-walks to engage with associates.

Road Safety Week (6th to 10th January 2014)

Road safety remains a critical area to engage with associates to sensitize them towards the importance of being safe
road users. The Road Safety Month, observed in the entire month of January 2014, saw various activities including
pledge campaign, display of banners and posters, interactions on Knome, road safety kiosks, training on two wheeler
and four wheeler driving, various engaging competitions, road safety quotient quizzes, skits and road shows, etc. The
participation and feedback received from the associates was very encouraging with associates realizing the
signiﬁcance of this issue.
13

Only work related lost time case have been considered from all geographies. It does not include the lost time cases on road in personal or public transport
involving associates travelling to and from work. These cases are tracked internally and reviewed and Road Safety awareness campaigns are aligned to
sensitize employees on Road Safety

43

Snapshots of associate engagement during Road Safety Month

Road safety pledge campaign
@ TCS Kolkata

Associate turn-out for movie-screening on
road safety @ TCS Trivandrum

Floor-walk to create awareness on
Road Safety @ TCS Trivandrum

Road safety pledge campaign @ TCS Kolkata

Talk on road safety by traﬃc police
@ TCS Kolkata

Two-wheeler safety training for lady associates
@ TCS Bhubaneswar

Road Safety kiosk made from waste material @ TCS Bangalore

Road Safety training to TCS cab drivers
@ TCS Kolkata

44

Facilitating the Safest driver @ TCS Bangalore

Our Community
Being part of the Tata group, TCS has a unique relationship with society at large. This section, highlights TCS'
global CSR initiatives – through volunteering, sponsorships and pro bono leveraging of our IT core capabilities –
in the areas of Education & Skill Building, Health, Environment and Aﬃrmative Action.
Tata Sons Ltd, the holding company of the Tata group, owns close to 75% of TCS. Around two-thirds of the equity
of Tata Sons Ltd is held by various philanthropic trusts – the largest being the Sir Dorabji Tata Trust and Sir Ratan
Tata Trust – which have created and nurtured leading national institutions for science and technology, medical
research, social studies and the performing arts.
These trusts also provide aid and assistance to various non-government organizations working in the areas of
education, healthcare and livelihoods. More details of the work funded by these trusts can be found on their
websites (www.dorabjitatatrust.org and www.srtt.com)
Direct and Indirect Economic Impact
The most significant, direct economic impact TCS has is the productivity benefits that clients gain from the
automation of their various business processes using the IT applications. Greater cost-efficiency and productivity
at a firm-level translates into higher productivity for the larger economy. Therefore, TCS has had a significant role
in the transformational phase of the global economy, marked by significant productivity gains from the
deployment of IT.
The productivity benefits from the Company's IT-related work directly translate into community benefits when
TCS engages with various governments to digitize their operations, particularly in the area of citizenry services.
DigiGovTM, an integrated system which facilitates optimized planning and execution among government
departments thereby impacting the working of government functions, is an example of TCS' service. The
Company does not believe that any part of its operations has a potential or actual negative impact on the
communities with whom it works.
TCS' profitable global operations result in payment of corporate taxes applicable in multiple countries. Thereby,
funding the governments indirectly to help improve the quality of their civic services. Tax expense relating to
overseas operations is determined in accordance with tax laws applicable in countries where such operations are
domiciled and provided for. In FY 2014, TCS provided for a total tax expense of $996 Mn, distributed across over
52 countries. Based on NASSCOM's figures for the entire sector, it is estimated that TCS contributed 0.92% to
India's GDP and our share of India's exports in FY 2014 is over 4%.
Direct and Indirect Employment
TCS' strategy of a distributed delivery capability, tapping into the local talent in each delivery location has
resulted in a largely balanced, positive economic impact through employment generation both direct and
indirect. Direct employment results in the creation of tens of thousands of white-collar jobs, broadening the tax
collections at the local, state and central levels.
Each delivery center has over a thousand employees. The construction of these massive campuses employs
architects, engineers and construction workers. Once the facility is commissioned, the center opens up
tremendous local employment opportunities for skilled workers while the vendor-partners hire housekeeping
staff, security guards, drivers, gardeners, maintenance workers, chefs, cafeteria staff etc.
The creation of these jobs creates a massive demand for local housing in the surrounding areas Moreover, the
beneficiaries of these net new jobs are often young (median age of the workforce: 28 years) and therefore tend
to display high consumption patterns, benefiting local businesses and by extension, the local economies.
All in all, it is conservatively estimated that we generate 32 indirect jobs for every 10 direct job¹⁴. Taking these
indirect jobs into account, TCS' consolidated, global employment generation footprint is estimated at over
870,000.
Infrastructure Development
The setting up of delivery centers promotes infrastructure development to accommodate the resultant growth
within the communities. . Local municipalities respond to the growing needs of the community. An
improvement in transport infrastructure and connectivity as well as an improvement in electricity and water
supply is expected outcomes of this growth.
Private and public sector partners respond to these developments by offering their services in areas including
telecom, healthcare, education etc.

45

Broad based Regional Development
Historically, the emergence of the Indian IT industry occurred in the four large metropolitan cities of New Delhi,
Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata Further expansion to Bangalore and Hyderabad occurred with a view to take
advantage of the available engineering talent and supporting infrastructure.
Recognizing the multiplier effect that the IT-BPO industry has on local economies, various state governments are
encouraging IT companies to establish centers in smaller cities. This is to broad-base the resultant economic
development beyond just the Tier I cities With a view to leverage benefits of low costs and a motivated local
workforce, the IT-BPO industry has started establishing centers in Tier II and Tier III cities TCS has been leading
this foray with headcount in Tier II/III cities* steadily growing as a percentage of our total India headcount over
the last 4 years.
Intangible benefits
TCS associates are well educated, well groomed young professionals. Almost a one third of the Company's
workforce comprises of women. The experience of working within a global company and among highly qualified
individuals allows employees to redefine preconceived notions and broaden their horizons. The evidence of
social progress and individual prosperity influences parents to invest in their children's education. Girls in
traditional communities find inspiration to seek higher education and pursue corporate careers. As a result there
is a positive impact on community outlook and behavior.

Corporate Social Responsibility: Nurturing People and Planet
Tata Consultancy Services Limited is an IT services, business solutions, and outsourcing organization that delivers
real results to global businesses, ensuring a level of certainty no other firm can match. Within its CSR activities,
TCS increasingly employs the use of technology as a key enabler to assist and resolve business challenges faced
by social organizations and to tackle development issues faced by diverse communities globally.
The core themes for TCS’ CSR programs are:
n

Education & Skill Development

n

Health

n

Environment

Programs under Education include IT enabled modules and advisory systems for learning and creating an interest
and enabling an interest in IT.
1. Adult Literacy Program
Since 2000, TCS has been using its expertise in IT to conceptualize and develop the modules for achieving
functional literacy among adults. Today, the Computer Based Functional Literacy (CBFL) software is available in 9
Indian languages and 3 foreign languages namely, Northern Sotho (South Africa) and Moore (West Africa) and
Arabic. Reaching out to 2,02,051 beneficiaries since inception including prison inmates in New Delhi and
Lucknow, this program has enabled marginalised communities in remote areas experience the power of IT
The CBFL software is available on www.tcsion.com/ALP

Beneﬁciaries of TCS' Adult Literacy Program

14

46

Source: NASSCOM

2. BPS Employability Program
Skill development with a focus on promoting IT/ITES employability has been a principal area of engagement.
Since 2010, TCS has dedicated itself towards addressing the issue of lack of exposure to contemporary skills within
India. The tremendous growth of India's IT/ITES sector and its future prospects can offer employment
opportunities. However, the lack of exposure to contemporary skills makes it difficult for the youth to gain entrylevel employment in the sector.
TCS launched a simple yet powerful employability training program for marginalised youth across India. This
Employability Training Program comprises 80 to 100 hours of powerful interactive content designed to develop
skills that increase their chances of finding employment. The training provides an effective platform for the
development of communication skills, corporate etiquette, interview skills, resume building and basic computer
knowledge. Above all, the program enables the trainees to become self-confident. Recruitment process for entry
level jobs is conducted by TCS BPS post the training. In 2013-14, 12,117 beneficiaries underwent training in 15
Indian states. This year 632 beneficiaries successfully joined TCS.

Creativity and Team Work at the BPS employability program
TCS was the ﬁrst organisation in India to sign an MOU with the National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) to
promote employability among youth from Jammu & Kashmir. Through 14 weeks of training designed by TCS,
Udaan seeks to improve skills relevant to the industry as well as increase employment opportunities available to
them. The Company trained 179 candidates in FY 14 of which 139 were oﬀered jobs in TCS. 15 women from
Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh, took part in Udaan's ﬁrst ever all women training batch. All 15 trainees were oﬀered
employment at TCS.
3. IT Employability Program
Encouraged by the success of the BPS Employability Program, in FY 14 TCS has embarked on a new initiative to
promote employability. Students in the 5th semester of four engineering colleges in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra, have received training through a specially designed 200 hour module
designed to promote employability in the IT sector.

47

4. Computer Operator cum Programming Assistant (COPA) ITI Training
The Faculty Development Program for Industrial Training Institute (ITI) instructors has helped to enhance the
capability of the faculty so that the quality and course delivery is in line with the latest industry practices. In
coordination with our technology specialists, we have trained COPA faculty from ITIs located in Uttar Pradesh,
Haryana, Gujarat, West Bengal, Maharashtra, Odisha, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. 106 trainees across 8 states have
been trained and certiﬁed by TCS under this initiative.

Participants attending a COPA session

5. Advanced Computer Training Center (ACTC)
Addressing skill deﬁcit leading to unemployment among visually impaired in India, TCS created IT-enabled
vocational courses that are in sync with the industry requirements in addition to providing training in
personality development and corporate etiquette. The Advanced Computer Training Center for Visually
Impaired (ACTC) has trained 136 individuals while facilitating employment for over 100 candidates across
multiple companies.

ACTC: Encouraging employability among the visually challenged youth in India

48

6. IT Wiz
Under CSR, the Company has also used quizzing as a medium to create an interest in IT. TCS IT Wiz, the biggest
inter school IT Quiz program in India, started in 1999 as a part of the educational Initiative to build awareness
and hone IT skills for young students. The program is the ﬁrst and the largest powerful knowledge platform of
this scale, on information technology for students of class 8-12. In FY2014, nearly 800,000 students from over
4000 schools across India and UAE participated in TCS IT Wiz.

Students enthusiastically participating in TCS IT Wiz

7. Rural IT Quiz
TCS has also partnered with the Government of Karnataka to start India's ﬁrst Rural IT Quiz in 2000. The Quiz
aims at enhancing IT awareness among students from rural areas, promoting inclusive growth and building
their conﬁdence. The Rural IT Quiz currently reaches rural students in Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra,
Chattisgarh and Rajasthan. In FY14 nearly 14.54 million students from over 8000 schools participated in the
Rural IT Quiz.
8. InsighT
The InsighT program is designed to meet the ISC, CBSE and State Board syllabus in India and uses a case study
methodology with a practical approach. InsighT seeks to promote team building, leadership, communication,
and presentation skills, along with technical skills. This year, InsighT was run in 30 schools during covering
1,433 students.

Students participate in the InsighT program

49

9. BridgeIT
BriDgeIT is a unique project to demonstrate the use of IT as a key enabler in school education, adult literacy and
creation of entrepreneurs in Jhansi district (Bundelkhand region), Uttar Pradesh. The program reaches 500 school
children through computer-aided learning, 250 adults through the adult literacy program and also provides
support to 5 Dalit entrepreneurs.

Beneﬁtting school children through BridgeIT
10. Empower
Through Empower, TCS aims at building capacity and capabilities of its support staﬀ at various TCS oﬃces in
India. Modules for training include acquiring basic computer skills, communication through English, and other
relevant soft skills. In FY14, 431 beneﬁciaries received training under the Empower program.

Enhancing communication skills of
security personnel in New Delhi, India
11. Global focus on STEM “Education to Careers”
Under the STEM “Education to Careers” banner in North America, TCS is working to create a robust framework to
promote interest and careers in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). The goIT Student
Technology program aims to increase students' interest in IT by providing in-school IT career and awareness
workshops, and hands-on technology education to high school students free of cost. Since its inception in 2009,
goIT has evolved from a two-school camp to a year-long program and has impacted over 7,000 students across
40 schools. 2 Schools have expanded their technology education courses & 4 schools have been assisted with
curriculum reviews. In addition, national level partnerships have been forged with leading organizations such as
US 2020, Million Women Mentors and nPower. 275 students from underrepresented minorities have been served
through US2020 & Citizen Schools. 160 disadvantaged youth, and 50 veterans have been trained through
npower and placed in internships & jobs.

50

TCS' STEM school program has been
appreciated in the US and Canada
In an expansion of its eﬀorts to promote interest in IT & technology, Go for IT was launched in Australia & China
this year. Go for IT is a one week structured and intensive work placement initiative designed to encourage girls
to consider IT as a career. TCS employees interact with the trainees also sharing their personal experiences,
providing insight into their current roles and thereby increasing the students' enthusiasm towards IT. In South
Africa, two innovative IT learning centres were created for the education of children as well as adults. In
partnership with Change the World, TCS appointed a trainer to train teachers and students in order to make the
most eﬃcient and eﬀective use of the IT centre. This year, the IT Futures program was launched in UK & I. The
program seeks to engage students at critical stages in education, while strengthening the ability of educators to
deliver eﬀective training and relevant skills. As part of this program, TCS is proud to be a founding donor of the
Queen Elizabeth Prize for Engineering.

Students participating in the IT Futures program, in the UK

12. Pro bono IT oﬀerings
The Company also works to providing pro bono end to end consultancy and architect comprehensive solutions
to enable social organizations to be eﬃcient and accountable.
The CSR Tech team has been instrumental in leveraging core competencies (i.e. feasibility assessment, analysis,
design, development and consulting) for social programs and initiatives. Large number of non-government
organizations (NGO) struggle to visualize and function with corporate style eﬃciencies. TCS' CSR Tech Team uses
information technology as a key enabler to assist such organizations and be instrumental in analyzing and
highlighting areas of improvement and suggesting processes and systems to increase in eﬃciency for social
organizations. This has assisted NGOs in highlighting visibility of program activities translating into
enhancement of NGO eﬃciency, credibility and accountability and fact based analysis. In 2013- 14 the CSR Tech
Team has focused on multiple health based initiatives for organizations like Retina India Foundation (Indian
Retina Repository) and Operation Smile (Patient Management System). CSR Tech Team has also prepared a Case
Management System to assist Justice and Care in tracking human traﬃcking cases.

51

An integrated Hospital Management System and IT infrastructure which includes a comprehensive and
fully integrated, web-based solution has been provided free of cost to the Cancer Institute at Chennai. FY14
marked successful operational usage of all 17 modules of Med Mantra.

Cancer Research Institute, Chennai, India
The institute was made paperless with integrated patient care across departments. Current patient clinical
records were put online, over 500,000 clinical investigation results reported and over 140,000 consultations
were performed.
TCS also designed and implemented a comprehensive Hospital Management System for Tata Medical
Centre, Kolkata. Running on a state of art IT infrastructure, TCS provided pro bono IT services valued at INR 4.2
crore in FY 14. TCS also funded and implemented an INR 2.7 crore Disaster Recovery and Business Continuity
Solution. Currently a Clinical Trial platform is also being developed.
China, one out of approximately every 600 newborn babies suﬀers from cleftings. Often, these children have
diﬃculty in eating, speaking, hearing and/or breathing properly. Currently, it is estimated that there are 2.5
million children in China suﬀering from cleftings. It takes as little as 45 minutes for an Operation Smile cleft lip
surgery to change a child's life. Operation Smile is an international children's medical charity that heals
children's smiles, forever changing their lives. Based on the Operation Smile international medical mission
model, teams of Chinese medical volunteers conduct local programs to take care of more Chinese children yearround. Smaller in size, Local Missions are carried out in remote areas of mainland China where patients from
small towns seek medical help. Working in close collaboration with Operation Smile, TCS has extended help in
designing a comprehensive IT system for the hospital in Hangzhou. The project oﬃcially kicked oﬀ in July, 2013.
Two associates have been allocated pro bono to conceptualize, drive and execute this project over the next few
months. The team has ﬁnished the requirements analysis, work plan, all the UI design, and a third of the coding.
The team also conducts a weekly update and review session via conference-call review with both internal teams
and the external client, the Hospital.
In India, the CSR Tech team was invited to do feasibility study for Operation Smile India at their center at
Guwahati to move towards a digitized model of capturing detailed patient medical records. The comprehensive
Patient Care system being built by TCS would assist Operation Smile in tracking patients more eﬃciently.
Volunteering through TCS Maitree

-

The Company cultivates and propagates volunteer-driven, meaningful activities
for TCS associates & their families in the domain of associate engagement and
community services. TCS Maitree is a core function of H.R. within TCS and is
based on the philosophy of Together, Caring and Sharing. TCS has grown
tenfold in the last decade with the workforce scattered around the globe in
innumerable locations. The essence of TCS Maitree is to come together; care
and share in the spirit of friendship within the TCS community, and then reach
out with the same spirit to the less privileged. During the year 81,269 TCS
associates volunteered 96,499 hours in CSR activities.

TCS is working to deploy a sustainable model to improve education, healthcare and environment and promote
economic empowerment in rural areas across India. To enhance their livelihood options in Panvel India, TCS
associates have trained 45 women in making eco-friendly jute bags through the 'Women Empowerment Program'.

52

TCS Maitree Women's Empowerment Programme

In this village more than 570 children are beneﬁtted through the provision of an infrastructure for clean
drinking water as well as supplementary support in the learning of science and mathematics. More than 250
people both children and adults have beneﬁtted from these initiatives in Panvel (Maharashtra), Nainar (Tamil
Nadu), Padmapur (Odisha), Challera (Uttar Pradesh).
TCS launched Purpose4Life, in March 2014 enabling employees
to commit to social causes. It is aimed to provide a platform for
scaling up eﬀorts of socially conscious associates in the areas of
health, education, and environment. Through Purpose4Life,
every associate can pledge their social contribution in terms of
volunteering hours in three focus areas - Health, Education and Environment. Associates can form teams
and immediate family members can be included as well.
Eco-Futures Program in UK
In UK, the Eco Futures program was launched in conjunction with award winning environmental charity Global
Action Plan (www.globalactionplan.org.uk). This initiative aims reaching and engaging employees in UK so that
collectively TCS' and our customers' environmental impact can be signiﬁcantly reduced.

Disaster Relief Eﬀorts in FY 14
Typhoon Yolanda Relief
On November 2nd, 2013, Typhoon Yolanda battered the Visayas Region in Philippines, leaving more than 4
million people displaced. In Philippines, TCS mobilized the eﬀorts of its employees to repack relief goods,
volunteered to organize a donations helpdesk, in addition to raising sums in support of two organizations
providing relief distributions, medical missions, trauma counselling to the ﬁve of the worst-hit provinces of
Iloilo, Northern Cebu, Palawan, Samar, and Leyte.
All items and funds raised were donated to the Philippine Red Cross Rizal Chapter (PRCRC) and the Operation
Blessing Phils., Inc., a non-proﬁt humanitarian aid foundation that provides short-term medical, disaster relief,
and assistance to economically disadvantaged individuals in Philippines and Asia.
Flood relief eﬀorts in Canada
Thousands of Canadians were impacted by the widespread ﬂooding that occurred during late June/early July
across Alberta and the Lac Mégantic train derailment which took place in Quebec on July 6th. These incidents
displaced people from their homes and communities and caused numerous deaths. TCS Canada setup donation
pages for each relief eﬀort through the Canadian Red Cross. Employees raised a combined $2,285 between both
relief eﬀorts. TCS matched employee's donations, doubling the impact of their gift in the lives of those in need.
Relief to victims of Boston Marathon
Following the Boston Marathon tragedy in April 2013, TCS encouraged associates to support relief eﬀorts by
contributing to The One Fund Boston. The charity was established by Massachusetts Governor & Boston Mayor
to help the people most aﬀected by the tragic events that occurred during the marathon received signiﬁcant
support from TCS. TCS provided a 100% matching contribution for employee donations.

53

Our Sustainability
Strategy and
Corporate Governance

Our Environment
TCS views sustainable growth as an imperative for a sustainable future. One Earth is not enough to meet the needs of
the people it is housing today.15 The rate of resource consumption is almost 1.5 times the rate at which nature can
replenish itself. The cumulative pressure that we are putting on the planet is leading to the deterioration of the
natural resources which have been at our disposal since time immemorial. At this rate, by 2050 even three earths will
not be enough to meet our needs.
Reversal of this impact on the environment is possible only through a collaborative eﬀort of governments, businesses
and society. This crisis poses an opportunity for businesses to innovate and be a part of the solution by radically
changing the way they do business in their operations, supply chain, products and services.
TCS acknowledges the role it needs to play as a responsible corporate citizen and targets to decouple the growth in
business and the impact on the environment through conscious changes in its strategy across the value chain. From
green buildings to green IT to green supply chain, the commitment is to grow sustainably and also help customers
achieve sustainable growth through green solutions and service oﬀerings.
The key pillars of successful environment sustainability have been a senior management commitment and
an integrated management systems approach guided by the TCS Environmental Policy16 and a beyond compliance
approach.17 96 TCS locations are certiﬁed for Environment Management System (EMS) under ISO 14001:2004 with
an ongoing commitment to bring additional and upcoming software development centers under scope of
certiﬁcation. With a strong focus on energy eﬃciency, LEED certiﬁed green infrastructure and green IT, TCS strives
towards reducing its speciﬁc energy and carbon footprint. TCS continues to maintain its focus on water eﬃciency
and reducing the demand on fresh water through wastewater treatment and closed loop recycling. Through
building eﬀective waste management capabilities aligned to the 3R principle, it aspires to become zero waste
discharge at campuses. Focus on the supply chain in extending the inﬂuence continues through communication
and engagement.

Beyond
compliance focus

Climate Change
Migitation

Resource
ef ficiency

Green
building
Infrastructure

Green IT

Green
Procurement

Supply Chain
focus

Employee
engagement

Environment Management @ TCS

15 Source: WWF Living Planet Report 2012
16 TCS' Environmental policy - http://www.tcs.com/about/corp_responsibility/environmental/Pages/default.aspx
17 Compliance to all relevant environmental laws, acts, rules and guidelines is monitored on an ongoing basis across all TCS sites. No instances of significant
non-compliance to environmental laws and regulations were brought to our notice in FY 2014.
18 All performance over the baseline year 2007-08

56

TCS' commitment & sustainable growth story is summarized in its environmental performance 18

Carbon & Energy
Target: Speciﬁc Carbon Footprint reduction by 50% by 2020
Performance

700
600
500
400
300

BAU growth
Sustainable Growth

200

2013-14

2012-13

2011-12

2010-11

2009-10

2007-08

2008-09

100

Electricity consumption (MWh)
900

Thousands

800
700
600
500
400
300
200

BAU growth
Sustainable Growth

39% reduction
in specific
Electricity
consumption

550% increase in
solar thermal
installation

34% reduction
in specific
Carbon Footprint

2.3% of total
power from
renewable sources

0.7 million tonnes of
Co2e & 926990 Mwh of
electricity avoided

61% reduction
in business air
travel emissions

2013-14

2012-13

2011-12

2010-11

2009-10

2008-09

100
2007-08

Thousands

Scope 1 + Scope 2 emmissions(tCO2e)

4 LEED
certified
campuses
Achieved
PUE between
2.0 to 1.77
across key
data centers

57

Water
Target: Water Neutrality19 by 2020

Millions

Performance

Water Consumption (kL)

4

3
2

BAU growth
Sustainable Growth

2013-14

2012-13

2011-12

2010-11

2009-10

2008-09

2007-08

1

217396 cum of
rainwater harvesting
potential created

13% reduction in specific
Water consumption
1.2 million kL of water
usage avoided

2.9 million of kL of water
recycled

Waste
Target: Zero Waste to Landﬁll by 2017
Performance

100% hazardous waste
is disposed through
government
authorized recyclers

100% paper
waste is
recycled

100% e-waste is
disposed through
government
authorized recyclers

14% biodegradable
waste recycled
on-site

Supply Chain
Target: Include vendor sustainability requirements in contract & conduct assessments by 2017
Performance
Study of vendor
landscape and
risk assessment

19

58

Inclusion of compliance to
Supplier Code of Conduct &
HSE requirements as a part
of contract conditions

Desktop review for
vendors making-up 80%
of the expenditure

Water Neutrality shall be achieved through a combination of water conservation at source, treatment, recycling and reuse & rainwater harvesting to
make good the freshwater consumed either within TCS campuses or through community based watershed management projects to benefit the society
and environment at large.

Carbon & energy management
Oﬃce buildings make up the largest building type within the commercial building sector and hence account for
the maximum energy consumption among buildings. Oﬃce buildings also oﬀer signiﬁcant energy eﬃciency
opportunities in new as well as existing buildings. While new buildings can be designed for higher energy
eﬃciency, existing buildings can be upgraded to improved building and energy management systems. This is
the fundamental approach TCS has adopted. Energy in the form of electricity is a key resource20 for TCS which is
essential for business operations. It is also the single largest contributor towards TCS' carbon footprint, Figure 19
(a & b). Energy management has been identiﬁed as a key focus area and TCS has taken up the objective is to
reduce the energy footprint through various measures like green building infrastructure, green IT, operational
energy eﬃciency, etc.
The sources of GHG emissions contributing to TCS's carbon footprint21 (Scope 1 & Scope 2) are:
·Scope 1: Diesel operated Generator sets, Company-owned vehicles, Refrigerant gases (fugitive) emissions,
cooking gas combustion, fuel combustion for space heating
Scope 2: Purchased Electricity
400,000

378,214

Tonnes of Co2 equivalent

350,000

300,555

300,000
250,000
200,000
150,000

2012-13

100,000

58,961
50,000

2013-14

44,375

Scope 1 emissions

Scope 2 - Purchased electricity

Figure 19-a Carbon Footprint (Scope 1 & Scope 2) distribution

Scope 1 carbon footprint distribution
50,000
45,000

43,967

40,000
35,000
30,000
25,000

24,653

20,000

15,796

15,000
10,000

11,247
2,817 2,842

5,000

259 385

0
Stationary Combustion
Diesel in Diesel Generators

Stationary Combustion
Cooking gas in cafeteria
kitchen

Stationary
Combustion
Space heating

671

700

Mobile Combustion Company owned fleet

Fugitive emissions Refrigerant from HVAC
system

Figure 19-b Scope 1 carbon footprint distribution

20 Being a services company, there is no direct material consumption in our operations. Resources consumed including electricity, water, physical infrastructure
and office information & communication technology equipment are auxiliaries which support our operations
21 Scope 1 and Scope 3 emissions have been calculated using the emissions factors published by the Green House Gas protocol. For Scope 2 emissions for India
i.e. purchased electricity related carbon emissions, the source is the emissions factor published by the CO2 Baseline Database for the Indian Power Sector, User
Guide, Version 9.0, January 2014 published by Central Electricity Authority of India. For Scope 2 emissions of overseas geographies emission factors published
by DEFRA have been referred.

59

The primary source of electricity at TCS is grid electricity with diesel generator (DG) sets used for back-up
power supply during power outages. Some TCS oﬃces have provision for roof-top solar and at some oﬃces
'green power' is procured through open access (hydroelectric power, wind power). Some overseas
locations use fuel for space heating. A source-wise breakup of the 502,461 MWh (2,031,486 GJ) of electricity
consumed by TCS in FY 2014 is given in Figure 20. The total direct energy consumption by primary energy
sources is 389,975 GJ (from fuel consumption in owned vehicles, diesel consumption in diesel generators,
combustion of cooking gas, space heating).
6.29%
2.28%

Electricity from Grid
Electricity from green sources

91.43%

Electricity from onsite
fuel combustion

Figure 20: Electricity Consumption by Source (%)

TCS strives to manage its energy and carbon footprint focussing on four key levers – Green Buildings,
Green IT, Operational eﬃciency and renewable energy.

Ÿ Energy efficiency by

Ÿ Onsite RE installations,

design

solar PV & solar thermal

Ÿ Energy efficient

Ÿ Procurement of RE

equipment

from third party

Energy &
Carbon
Management

Ÿ Operational efficiency

Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ

Server virtualization
Server consolidation
Cooling optimization
Green procurement

Green Buildings
TCS views green infrastructure as a key tool for sustainable growth by reducing the ecological footprint of
oﬃce spaces. All new oﬃces coming up are designed as per LEED Green Building standards for high energy
and resource eﬃciency. LEED certiﬁed TCS oﬃces include Siruseri–Chennai, Kalinga Park–Bhubaneswar,
Peepul Park-Trivandrum, Sahayadri Park–Pune. Sahayadri Park got certiﬁed this year as LEED Gold. The
other upcoming facilities at Hyderabad, Kochi, Trivandrum, Indore and Ahmedabad are also designed as
green buildings and will be certiﬁed under LEED. Some of the new oﬃce spaces which TCS has leased are
also LEED certiﬁed. Energy eﬃciency is a key criterion for new leases of oﬃce spaces.

60

TCS Sahyadri Park, Pune (L-R) - The rear-side building envelope covered
with metal screen to minimize solar heat gain overlooking the beautiful
landscape; Maximum use of natural day light and natural ventilation; Use of LED
street lighting in the campus
Some key features of the TCS green buildings include energy eﬃcient design of building envelope, energy
eﬃcient electrical and mechanical equipment, onsite renewable energy (rooftop solar photovoltaic panels),
solar thermal installations (hot water generators), chiller waste heat recovery units, solar PV based peripheral
lighting systems, etc. In FY 2014, TCS added solar water heaters in 4 oﬃces in India (taking the total to 28 oﬃces)
increasing its solar water heater capacity by 5.5 times over 2007-08 (21). This helps reduce the energy used in
heating water in kitchens and gymnasium washrooms.

Solar water capacity (litres/day)
100,000

86,600

90,800

80,000

55,600

60,000
40,000
20,000

38,100

40,100

2009-10

2010-11

21,500
13,900

0
2007-08

2008-09

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

Figure 21: Solar Water Heater Capacity (L/day)22

Green IT
TCS has a dedicated team within the internal IT function to ensure a substantial focus on greening the IT
infrastructure. TCS' Green IT journey has been focusing on data centres as well as distributed IT energy eﬃciency
apart from enhancing the green quotient of the IT equipment itself. New data centers are designed for higher
energy eﬃciency to maintain average Power Usage Eﬀectiveness (PUE) value of 1.5. Concurrently existing data
centers are undergoing rigorous assessment for improvements in energy eﬃciency and PUE as part of TCS'
sustainability roadmap.
In order to achieve the target on data center PUE management and attain a weighted average PUE of 1.65 by
2016 across key data centers, TCS has adopted a RAID (Review, Agree, Implement and Demonstrate) approach
and identiﬁed timely milestones for eﬀective monitoring and tracking.
Some of the initiatives towards PUE management are n

IT Load optimization through server consolidation, virtualization, removal of ghost and power hungry
systems, shift to energy eﬃcient IT equipment,

n

Cooling eﬃciency improvement through capacity rationalization, raising data center temperature to 23-24
degree from 18-19 degree Celsius (without compromising operational requirement), optimal rack alignment
and replacement of solid glass doors with perforated doors to ensure better air circulation, cold containment,
etc. With cooling infrastructure contributing 40-60% to the total data center power consumption, this is a
strong focus area for driving energy eﬃciency. TCS leveraged on internal capability, in-house developed tools

61

– Power-Assess and Power-Insight, for thermal analysis of the data center layout to implement data centre
power management initiatives
n

Reduction of losses in power distribution through UPS load optimization

All of the above green initiatives have helped TCS improve the PUE of the 11 data centers selected this year from
2.4 - 2.1 in FY 2012-14 to 2.0 - 1.77 in FY 2013-14.

Eﬃcient Operations
Eﬀective operational controls are as important as eﬃcient design to maximize the performance and derive ecobeneﬁts. In order to optimize performance, TCS has a multi-pronged approach. The new campuses are equipped
with remote energy monitoring and management system which is closely controlled and analysed to ensure
maximum energy eﬃciency. TCS is working to deploy a remote energy monitoring system in some of the older
oﬃces which are identiﬁed as power guzzlers along with energy audits to identify opportunities towards energy
eﬃciency. Apart from this, control measures implemented across all locations include
·optimization of HVAC operating hours to ensure energy saving without compromising on thermal comfort as per
building standards,
n

optimization of illumination levels to meet work environment guidelines as well as energy eﬃciency codes,

n

installation of Variable Frequency Drives (VFD) in air handling units,

n

power factor management,

n

energy eﬃcient lighting ﬁxtures,

n

remote desktop power management, and

n

employee engagement

Renewable energy
The energy eﬃciency measures help us reduce our carbon footprint, but use of energy is inevitable for our
operations and hence to further mitigate our climate impact, TCS has been keenly considering renewable energy
as a substitute for high carbon energy. Believing in making a diﬀerence wherever possible, small renewable
energy installations are installed across diﬀerent oﬃces including solar peripheral lights, solar electrical fencing
system, solar hot water generators, etc. At the campuses, roof-top solar power plants are also installed to cater
partly to the energy demand. Additionally, TCS is looking at procurement of renewable energy through open
access mechanism and targets to increase this capacity over the next few years to achieve a target of 20%
renewable component by 2020. In FY 2013-14 the total renewable energy component was 2.28% of the total
energy consumed.

TCS Dusseldorf, Germany - The first TCS office to go Carbon Neutral*
“Every business and we, as individuals, should pledge to do our bit to protect
the environment and catalyze a change tosave our future generations.”
In June 2013, with a vision to do business “The Responsible
TATA Way” and a target to reduce our carbon footprint and
reduce climate change impact, TCS-Dusseldorf took up a
goal to switch to renewable power by January 2014. The
aspiration to become ‘Carbon Neutral’ within our own
operations catalyzed the strategic decision to shift from
conventional power to green power from renewable
resources like wind and solar.

Sapthagiri Chapalapalli,
Region Head, Central Europe

After sustained efforts, TCS Dusseldorf is today proud to say
that it is the first TCS office globally to go carbon neutral by
purchasing 100% power from renewable sources.
*Scope 2 emissions

62

At TCS, environmental initiatives are seen as part of the overall operational and infrastructure improvement and
the expenditure is not tracked separately. Green building projects are included in the capital expenditure while
expenditures like monitoring and measurement costs, small energy eﬃciency projects, compliance fees are
included as a part of the operational budget for the facility.
TCS has successfully reduced its speciﬁc carbon and energy footprint through appropriate mitigation measures
clearly demonstrating the decoupling of business growth and increase in absolute carbon and energy
footprint.23 All these initiatives have helped TCS reduce its energy consumption by 9.5% over FY 2013 and 39%
over baseline year FY 2008 (Figure 22).

Electricity consumption (kWh/FTE/month)
350

319

275

300

267

246

250

231

216

196

200
150
100
50
0

2007-08

2008-09

2009-10

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

Figure 22: Electricity Consumption (kWh/FTE/month)
The combined GHG emissions (Scope 1 + Scope 2) was 1.9724 in FY 2014 as compared to 1.99 in the last ﬁnancial
year, 34% less than the baseline year 2008 (Figure 23).

Scope 1 + Scope 2 emissions (tCO2e/FTE/annum)
3.50
3.00

3.00
2.71
2.44

2.50

2.35

2.12

2.00

1.99

1.97

1.50
1.00
0.50
0.00

2007-08

2008-09

2009-10

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

Figure 23: Carbon Footprint (Scope 1 + Scope 2) in tCO2e/FTE/annum

23 The FTE count increased by 2.27 times while the absolute carbon footprint (Scope 1 + Scope2) has increased by only 1.16 times over the baseline year.
14 The year-on-year reduction in specific carbon footprint is only 1% due to significant increase (by over 10%) in the National grid emission factor for India
geography. Electricity consumption contributes over 90% of the Scope 1 + Scope 2 carbon footprint. The Company has reduced specific electricity
consumption by 9% over last year and by 39% over the baseline year through ongoing efforts on energy efficiency. Hence, despite the 10% reduction in
specific electricity consumption, our specific carbon footprint has reduced by only 1% due to a high increase in the National grid electricity emission factor.
Using the same grid emission factor as FY 2012-13, the reduction in specific carbon footprint is 8% over last financial year taking the overall carbon footprint
reduction to 39% over the baseline year (2007-08).

63

Scope 3 carbon footprint
This includes other indirect carbon emissions, which are a consequence of company's activities but occur
from sources not owned or controlled by the Company. Often this typically comprises most of the total
carbon footprint for any organization. TCS undertook a study to quantify the indirect emissions due to its
operations in FY 2013-14 as per the GHG Protocol Scope 3 accounting standard.
The Scope 3 accounting standard by the GHG Protocol classiﬁes emission sources into pre-deﬁned
categories and the accounting has to be done as per these categories. The various categories of Scope 3
emission sources applicable to TCS along with the approach and reporting boundaries are described
below:
n

Category 1 – Purchased goods & services: The carbon footprint from the information and
communication technology equipment purchased, which are not capitalized, is accounted under
purchased goods. The services which TCS procures for infrastructure management are delivered from
within TCS premises and hence get accounted for in Scope 1 & Scope 2 emissions.

n

Category 2 – Capital goods: Emissions from oﬃce machinery, equipment, furniture, computer, servers,
electrical machinery which are capitalized are accounted for in this category.

n

Category 3 – Fuel and energy related activities (not included in Scope 1 and Scope 2): The emissions
associated with upstream extraction, production and transportation and T&D losses due to the
electricity consumed in TCS oﬃces are quantiﬁed under this category.

n

Category 4 – Upstream transportation and distribution: IT goods constitute a signiﬁcant % of the
Company's overall purchase. The upstream transportation and distribution emission for the IT purchases
have been quantiﬁed based on the Life Cycle study published by key suppliers to TCS for diﬀerent IT
assets like desktop, laptop and servers

n

Category 5 – Waste generated in operations: Emissions associated with waste disposal have been
quantiﬁed taking into consideration the recycled quantities, waste treatment and the disposal methods.

n

Category 6 - Business travel: Business air travel is very relevant and material to TCS due to the nature
of business and operating model. The GHG emission from business air travel (Scope 3)25 has reduced by
61% over baseline year and is 0.31 tCO2e/FTE/annum, and is a reduction of 9% over the last ﬁnancial
year. The reduction has been possible due to the organization's commitment to optimize the business
air travel through strict controls and by encouraging audio and video conferencing. The year-on-year
trend is given in Figure 24-b.

Business air travel emissions (tCO2e/FTE/annum)
1.00

0.80
0.44

0.50

0.52

0.44

0.42

0.34

0.31

2012-13

2013-14

0.00

2007-08

2008-09

2009-10

2010-11

2011-12

Figure 24-b Carbon Footprint (Scope 3-Business Air Travel) in tCO2e/FTE/annum
Category 7 - Employee Commuting: It has two components - travel by company provided hired vehicles &
travel in personal or public transport. The vehicle kilometers for company provided hired vehicles is
monitored by type of vehicle and fuel and used to account for the associated emissions. For employees
commuting in personal or public transport, the number of employees using personal transport (two
wheeler or wheeler) is collected from the parking pass issue records and the remaining are assumed to
travel by public transport. We have assumed that on an average a person would travel 30 km in a day for
work based on the average distance of our oﬃces in any city from the geographical centre. Emissions are
accounted for based on the passenger kilometer and the respective emission factor for passenger car,
motorbike, bus and train as diﬀerent modes of transport. With India geography as base to over 90% of
associates, this data is reported for the India geography only.
25

64

Business air travel emissions are for all geographies and hence the FTE used is total FTE across all geographies.

The proﬁle of the Scope 326 categories applicable to TCS is given below in Figure 24-a.

14.97%

5.64%
11.45%

250,000

31.32%

197,307

200,000

173,990
150,000
35.51%

100,000

0.65%
0.47%

63,610
50,000

83,161

31,324
2,598
Category 1 Purchased goods
& services

Category 2 - Category 3 - Fuel &
Capital goodsenergy related activities
(not included in
Scope 1 or 2)

Category 4 Upstream
transportation
& distribution

3,584
Category 5 Waste generated
in operations

Category 7 Employee
Commuting

Category 6 Business travel

Figure 24-a : Scope 3 carbon footprint distribution
Ozone Depleting Substances
Some of the refrigerants like R-22 used in the HVAC systems have an Ozone Depleting Potential (ODP). All the
ozone depleting refrigerant gases as per the Montreal Protocol will be phased out and replaced with ODP free
refrigerants in line with the country-speciﬁc timelines agreed as per the Montreal Protocol and country
regulations. The new facilities coming up at TCS have HVAC systems based on non-ozone depleting refrigerants.
ODS emissions reported are primarily in the form of system losses / fugitive emissions during maintenance and
repair. During maintenance, the refrigerant is extracted in sealed containers before the system is opened for
repair and recharged back into the system after completion, thereby ensuring that there is no signiﬁcant release
of refrigerant to the atmosphere. The ODP of the total refrigerant emissions to the atmosphere in FY 2014 was
0.41 tonnes.
Other Emissions
Emissions of SOx and NOx gases from the diesel generator sets (used as standby source of power during power
outages) are as given below:

Emissions
Sox
Nox

Quantity (tonnes)
5
661

Water Performance
Water neutrality, the ambitious goal which TCS has set for itself, is an endorsement of the TATA Group's larger
commitment to give back to the society. The pillars of TCS' water target are water eﬃciency by design in new
oﬃces/campuses, 100% treatment and recycling of sewage and rainwater harvesting (within TCS premises and
outside, as a part of our CSR).
Fresh water comes through various sources like municipality or the industrial development authority, water
tankers, bore-wells, and packaged drinking water (at some sites). The source-wise breakup of the 2.75 million kL
of water consumed in FY 2014 is given in Figure 25. Groundwater is used only for landscaping.27

26 Emission factors used are from DEFRA 2013 & DEFRA 2012 – GHG conversion factors, GHG Protocol All sector tools 2014, Lifecycle GHG assessment study
published by key suppliers of ICT equipment to TCS.
No natural water source is directly impacted due to water consumption by TCS. For offices where measurement systems are not available, we use thumb-rule
assumptions to estimate the quantity of water consumed/recycled/reused.

27

65

1%

29%

50%

Municipal
Borewell
Tanker
Bottled

20%

Figure 25: Freshwater consumption by source
Some of the steps taken to reduce fresh water consumption include:
n

Dual plumbing in toilets so that recycled water can be used for ﬂushing

n

Low ﬂow water taps with variable output and sensors

n

Drip irrigation system for landscape watering

n

Regular maintenance of water pumps to maintain high eﬃciency

n

Providing sewage treatment plants where feasible and use of treated sewage for non-consumptive uses
like cooling tower make-up, toilet ﬂushing and gardening

n

Employee involvement in water conservation measures through engagement and awareness

As an outcome of the above measures, fresh water consumption per capita has decreased by 13% over
baseline year FY 2008 (increased marginally over last year) (as shown in Figure 26). We have been able to
maintain the freshwater consumption levels despite the increase in campus based operations (large
landscaped areas with higher water requirement) due to better water management.

Fresh water consumption (litres/FTE/month)
1,400
1,200

1,234

1,242

1,253
1,104

1,073

1,076

1,072

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

1,000
800
600
400
200
0

2007-08

2008-09

2009-10

Figure 26: Fresh Water Consumption (liters/FTE/month)
Many TCS facilities have sewage treatment plants (STP). The treated eﬄuent from the STP is tested regularly
against applicable eﬄuent disposal standards and recycled for use in HVAC cooling tower make-up, toilet
ﬂushing and gardening. The recycled treated sewage quantity has increased from 610,577 kL to 805,051 kL
with the commissioning of new TCS projects designed for zero water discharge (Figure 27).

Recycled water (kL)
1,000,000

805,051
800,000

526,729

600,000
400,000
200,000

140,612

234,701 268,901

610,577

306,652

0

2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13

Figure 27: Recycled water after treatment (kL)
66

2013-14

The percentage of the total treated sewage recycled out of the total fresh water consumed has increased from
27% in FY 2013 to 30% in FY 2014. All upcoming new TCS facilities have STPs designed for 100% treatment and
further recycling of the treated eﬄuent.28
In order to achieve water sustainability various eﬀorts are made & implemented by TCS in its owned and leased
premises wherever feasible. Rain water harvesting is an important feature of building design in the form of roof
top collection system, collection and storage tanks, recharging to bore wells, recharge trenches and pits, and in
some cases, water bodies for storing rain water.
Siruseri, Chennai and Synergy Park, Hyderabad have large rainwater lakes. The rainwater harvested at TCS Siruseri
served 7% of the total water demand at the location in FY14, hence contributing towards water sustainability.
These lakes also play a role in replenishing surrounding water table through recharge of ground water thereby
helping neighboring communities with water availability in their wells and bore wells.
There has been 46% increase in the rainwater harvesting potential created at TCS sites in FY 2014 over the
previous year (Figure 28). The current rainwater harvesting potential is 40% of the total groundwater used across
TCS facilities.

Rainwater Harvesting Potential (Cum)
250,000

217,396

200,000

135,430

150,000
100,000

54,745

59,358

2007-08

2008-09

87,602

96,741

2009-10

2010-11

148,769

50,000
0

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

Figure 28: Rainwater Harvesting Potential in cubic meter (cum)

Waste Management
Being an IT services and consulting organization, there are no process wastes or signiﬁcant primary wastes and
emissions. In this section, we discuss the various emissions and wastes generated by our oﬃce-based operations
and the steps taken to mitigate their impact.
Our solid waste generation is fairly limited and restricted primarily to municipal solid waste (MSW). We also
generate electronic and electrical waste (E-waste) and a small proportion of potentially hazardous wastes like
lead-acid batteries, waste lube oil, etc. which are regulated in many part of the world including India where there
are speciﬁc regulations governing their handling and disposal.
Municipal solid waste today is a growing concern with limited landﬁll space available. It is one of the contributing
factors for global warming and climate change. Our waste management practices seek to reduce the
environmental impact of waste streams to the extent possible by reduction in generation, segregation at source,
reuse and recycle where possible, and proper management to achieve the ultimate goal (long-term target) of
disposing less than 5% waste to landﬁll. For each category of waste in our oﬃces the management practices are
summarized below –
n

Waste lube oil, UPS (lead-acid) batteries, E-waste – disposed through government authorized recyclers in
compliance with local regulations

n

Waste paper - Sent for recycling

n

Printer toner cartridges - Sent back to the manufacturer under product take-back arrangement

n

Bio-degradable garden waste – Vermi-composting

n

Bio-degradable food waste - Generation of biogas / composting or sent to piggeries as feed

n

Other mixed dry waste - Sent to scrap dealers or municipal disposal

28

No significant impact on biodiversity of water bodies or related habitats by discharged water and runoff.

67

Environmentally Sustainable Biodegradable Waste management
TCS continuously strives to reduce waste generation at source through rigorous associate awareness
campaigns and training cafeteria staﬀ to minimize the biodegradable waste generated Figure 29.

Waste generated (kg/FTE/annum)
25

19.9

20

16.9

15
10

14

14.7

2008-09

2009-10

18.2

17.7

2012-13

2013-14

8

5
0

2007-08

2010-11

2011-12

Figure 29: Waste Generated (Kg/FTE/yr)29
TCS' sustainable waste roadmap emphasizes on the 3R principle to mitigate emissions and to achieve the
goal of “zero waste to landﬁll”. The ﬁrst step to any waste management practice is waste segregation at
source. The hierarchy for disposal of biodegradable waste is biogas recovery through bio-digesters
(methane avoidance) followed by composting, disposal as feed to piggeries and, as the last resort, to the
municipal waste collection system where no other options are available. The technology selected depends
upon the space availability and the estimated food waste generation. In FY 2014, 14% of the total wet
waste generated was treated through onsite composting or bio-digester treatment.
Bio-digesters are installed at some of oﬃces in Pune, Mumbai and Trivandrum. The biogas generated from
the bio-digesters is used as fuel in the kitchens. Smaller solutions like organic waste converters are chosen
for smaller oﬃces with space constraint and low volumes of waste generation. This year TCS has added
biodegradable waste treatment capacity of 2.3 tonnes per day (TPD) across 3 oﬃces with a planned
capacity addition of over 7 TPD in the next ﬁnancial year. Vermicomposting initiatives for handling
horticultural (garden) waste continue to progress well. A total of 60 tonnes of compost was generated from
garden waste in FY 2014 which is used as fertilizer within our campuses. This is an excellent bio-fertilizer
and avoids the use of chemical fertilizers thereby avoiding soil / groundwater pollution and also maintains
good health of the vegetation.

Paper management initiative
Though paper is not a material resource for TCS, we have focused on reducing paper consumption
primarily since paper manufacturing involves cutting trees, generates high levels of pollution. This would
also help us to reduce cost. Paper management at TCS is based on the waste management hierarchy with
waste reduction at the pinnacle. Our success on paper consumption reduction initiative is evident from the
reduction achieved in per capita paper consumption; 6.8% reduction over last year and 78% reduction over
the baseline (Figure 30).

Paper consumption (Reams/1000FTE/month)
300

231
200

133
87

100

72

65

55

51

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

0

2007-08

2008-09

2009-10

Figure 30: Paper consumption (Reams/1000 FTE/month)

29

68

Data given is only for India geography since most overseas locations are multi-occupancy facilities where waste handling and disposal are
handled by the building authority and hence not under TCS' control

Much of this reduction can be attributed to migration of many paper-based processes to automated ones,
reduced demand by clients to provide multiple hard copies of documents and migration to soft copy formats
rather than hard copies. However, a key reduction has been achieved through creating awareness among
associates and also enforcing printing discipline through automated as well as manual means.
The paper waste which is generated is carefully segregated, shredded and sent for recycling. In some cases, they
are sent to NGOs which also supply stationery items (notepads, ﬁles, etc.) made from recycled paper back to TCS.
In FY 2014, the recycling initiative strengthened where 100%30 recycling of the total paper waste was achieved.
E-waste Management
The E-waste generated at the various TCS facilities includes defunct computers, monitors, servers, etc. and
speciﬁed electronic and electrical items. Management of E-waste is as per TCS' E-waste Management policy
which complies with the WEEE directive / local regulations, various country regulations, including the
Government of India's E-waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2011. E-waste dismantlers and recyclers
undergo a due-diligence audit process to verify their HSE legal compliances through a desktop review and a site
audit, thereby extending 'duty of care' to the supply chain. HSE process deployment and eﬀectiveness is also
evaluated over and above compliance. Those found to be lacking at basic deployment rigor and eﬀectiveness are
excluded from the disposal contract process. In FY 2013-14, 20 vendors were evaluated through the duediligence process; 17 vendors qualiﬁed the due-diligence process while 3 vendors were disqualiﬁed from the
contract process based on HSE performance criteria.
In FY 2014, 1160131 numbers of waste computers were disposed of through government authorized handlers /
recyclers or as per regulations applicable in each country. In addition, computers which were in working
condition but deemed obsolete for TCS's purposes were donated to educational and charitable institutions which
have use for such equipment. Recipients of such donations are required to return the hardware to TCS once it
reaches end-of-life at their end or arrange for proper disposal through government authorized E-waste vendors.
TCS oﬀers to facilitate this disposal through the authorized channels.
Hazardous Waste Management
For India operations hazardous wastes (as deﬁned by regulations) are handled and disposed of as per the
Hazardous Waste Handling and Management Rules, 2008, only through government authorized vendors. TCS
conducts compliance and site audits before registering hazardous waste vendors as a part of its supply chain
sustainability drive. Similarly, appropriate local regulations are followed in other geographies where applicable.
However, due to the relatively small proportion of TCS-operated facilities in overseas geographies (which are
mostly leased and operated by building owners), the generation of such wastes is rather marginal and is
appropriately handled through the building operators.

Hazardous Wastes Disposed33
Lube oil from DG sets (litres)
Used batteries from UPS systems (nos.)

FY 2014
31,086
2,714

Employee Engagement
We engage with our associates creating environmental awareness and sensitizing them towards nature and
conserving its various resources. The training methodologies used range from induction training to continuous
learning to awareness mailers to various campaigns and competitions on environment. The total training manhours imparted this year on health, safety and environment was over 380,000. We also have an Ecology Club
under the employee engagement forum TCS Maitree, where associates come together and engage in various
activities like clean-up drives, awareness sessions, road-shows, tree plantations drives, sapling distribution, etc.
Some of the days observed include World Earth Day (April 2013), World Bio-diversity Day (May 2013), World
Environment Week (June 2013), Green Consumer Day (September 2013), World Wildlife Week (October 2013),
Pollution Control Day (December 2013), Energy Conservation Day (December 2013), World Water Day (March
2014), Earth hour campaign (March 2014).

31
32
33

Data for all geographies.
There were no reported spills of hazardous wastes in FY 2014. Zero percent of our wastes are shipped internationally and none are deemed hazardous under
the terms of the Basel Convention Annex I, II, III, and VIII.
Data only for India geography.

69

World Environment Week, June 2013
The Environment Week 2013 was celebrated with great enthusiasm throughout TCS with the UNEP's theme
for the week, “Think-Eat-Save”, as an anti-food waste campaign. The week-long celebration from 3rd to 7th
June was implemented with day speciﬁc theme on environment & sharing of information on TCS
environment strategy and performance. Several environmental conservation programs were implemented
including inauguration of various green Initiatives, resource conservation, and informative lectures by
experts, exhibitions & competitions.

Inauguration of Organic Waste Converter by UNICEF Chief ,
UP Alede Khurd at Awadh Park, Lucknow on WED 2013

Environmental Pledge and Pollution Check Camp @ Kolkata

Laying of Foundation stone of Bio-digester @ Kochi
& Inaugration of Vermi-composting @ Kalinga Park,

71

Plantation drive @ Kalinga Park and Green Initiative walkthrough @ Pune

Associate involvement in various programs is reﬂected through participation which was over 28,000 during the
week. TCS had associated with various external agencies/organizations such as UNICEF, WWF, Social Forestry Dept,
Govt. of Gujarat, Biotech-India, VFPC - Kerala, Suchitra Kitchen Composter, Excel Industries Ltd., Tata Motors, TVS,
Hariyali (NGO), etc. for various activities across the various oﬃces. It was during the week that the Road Map for
Sustainable Water Use & Waste Management was rolled out as a ﬁrm action plan towards the environmental
sustainability goals.

Employee engagement case-study –
Aﬀorestation drive in joint venture with Department of Social Forestry, Government of Gujarat
@ TCS Gandhinagar
The aﬀorestation drive @ TCS Gandhinagar was initiated in the World Environment Week 2013 as a part of social
and environmental commitment of the organization towards Greening Gujarat Mission. It involved plantation of
5200 trees in an area of 3.5 hectare in association with the Social Forestry Department, Government of Gujarat at
Gandhinagar. Traditional native tree species with high ecological value were selected such as Ficus Benghalensis
(Banyan Tree), Tamarindus Indica (Tamarind Tree), Ficus Religiosa (Peepul Tree), Manilkara Hexandra (Ceylon Iron
Wood/ Khirni), Hymenodictyon Orixense (Bridal Couch Tree), Buteam Monosperma (Palash Tree) , Mangifera Indica
(Mango Tree).

(L-R) Inaugural address by Dr. H.S. Singh, additional Chief Conservator of Forests,
Govt. of Gujarat to associates on
WED 2013 at Gandhinagar; TCS associates participation in Strip Plantation Program
The plantation was initiated on World Environment Day 2013 in presence of Dr. H.S. Singh, additional Chief
Conservator of Forests, Govt. of Gujarat, as chief guest in presence of the Chief Conservator of Forest, District
Forest Oﬃcer and about 600 associates from TCS participated in plantation program at Gandhinagar.

72

Eco-engagement case study @ TCS UK
TCS UK with support from GAP, rolled out environmental awareness campaigns across all of our oﬃces in
2013-14. The themes were Energy Consumption (Switch Oﬀ September), Waste Generation (No Waste
November), and Business Travel (Journey Less January) - with each of the campaigns running for a
period of 4 weeks. The objective of the campaigns was to increase awareness of environmental impacts to
inﬂuence behavioural change.
HSE champions and Eco-enthusiasts volunteered to drive the campaigns at their oﬃces. They were
provided with tool kits containing key messages and facts, posters and ideas on how to engage their
peers. They acted as local champions, taking ownership of the delivery and monitoring of the campaign
through ﬂoor walks, distributing local communications and creating a buzz through competitions, quizzes
and events
Switch oﬀ September
At the beginning of the campaign each centre surveyed and identiﬁed electrical appliances that were left
on at the end of the working day. A “switch oﬀ” message was left on all these appliances and the survey
was conducted every week. This was supported by a visual campaign with poster displays and
demonstration of an energy bike on site at Peterborough and Liverpool. A pledge campaign was run to
encourage stronger commitment. Competitions and quizzes were organized for engagement.

No Waste November
Each centre identiﬁed how they could support this campaign. Where recycling banks were already in place,
better signage was provided and “which bin” drop in sessions were organised. All printers were set to
duplex printing mode only. The TCS Leamington Spa oﬃce replaced the paper cups with ceramic mugs
and all the other TCS London oﬃces replaced the under the desk bins with communal recycling banks. The
campaign was brought to life with visual diplay sculptures, a bin amnesty and a count down to removing
under the desk bins and an end of campaign print oﬀ competition.

73

Journey less January
This campaign identiﬁed how reducing our carbon foot print and looking after our wellbeing were linked. Each
delivery centre was provided with local travel information and walking routes, which was displayed on notice
boards and local intranet sites. Posters and information on tele and video conferencing was communicated,
reminding colleageagues that alternative meeting facilities were kinder to the environment and less time
consuming. GAP visited London and Redhill with a driving simulator to raise awarness on how diﬀerent driving
styles eﬀect the amount of fuel consumed.

These campaigns were widely recognised for the support of senior management, with the country head acting as
an ambassador by sending out launch emails and promoting “best practice” by taking part in the bin amnesty.
As a result of the Switch Oﬀ September campaign, there has been an average reduction of 25% of appliances left
on across all oﬃces which were surveyed. Since replacing the under the desk bins with communal recycling
banks at our London oﬃces, there has been a 26% increase in the amount of waste being recycled.
The messages delivered during the campaigns continue to be embedded with each delivery centre brieﬁng new
staﬀ on environmental initiatives during the induction process including waste and energy management and
public travel information.

Biodiversity Conservation and Enhancement
Vulture Conservation Program at Srivardhan, Maharashtra
Vultures are among the largest ﬂying birds & nature's most successful scavengers. They provide an extensive
array of ecological, economic and cultural services in terms of their ability to dispose animal & human remains.
Scavenging on carcasses they not only promote the ﬂow of material and energy through food-webs, but also
protect the health of humans & wildlife.
Vulture populations have shown rapid decline globally due to various reasons such as loss of nesting habitat,
infectious diseases, use of veterinary drugs, environmental pollution, deliberate poisoning of carnivores leading
to secondary poisoning (bioaccumulation), low food availability as well as exploitation & persecution.

A close view of White backed Vulture (Gyps bengalensis),
Long billed Vulture(Gyps indicus) and vulture nests on coconut tree at Srivardhan, Maharashtra

The decline in Vulture population due to Diclofenac poisoning has become an issue of severe environmental
concern in India. According to the IUCN Red List, Indian Vulture (Gyps Indicus), and White-backed Vulture (Gyps
Bengalensis) are classiﬁed as critically endangered and in urgent need for protection.

74

These vulture species are found in the Konkan belt of Maharashtra and Sahyadri Nisarga Mitra (SNM) is an
NGO working for their conservation. TCS has extended support to the NGO for vulture conservation
program in this belt.
The Vulture Conservation program includes, population survey, identiﬁcation of vulture nests, ﬁnancial
compensation to land owners against loss of coconut fruit as a consequence of vulture droppings,
provision of feeding ground within the study area, campaign against use of Diclofenac in various medical
shops within surrounding villages, discussion with animal husbandry department and veterinary doctors,
and awareness amongst the local population regarding vulture conservation. During population survey a
total 39 nests of vultures has been recorded in Srivardhan which will be monitored during the year.

Marine Turtle Conservation Program
TCS along with Sahyadri Nisarga Mitra (a NGO based near Mumbai) has implemented Marine Turtle
Conservation Program on participatory basis since 2010-11 to address the cause of protecting breeding
sites of globally endangered species of marine Olive Ridley Turtles (Lepidochelys olivacea). We continue to
support this biodiversity conservation initiative over the last three years and simultaneously enhancing
impact by extending the program to 6 villages - Anjarle, Harihareswar, Kelshi, Maral, Shekhadi and Velas in
Maharashtra.
Various turtle conservation activities include preventing the killing/hunting of turtle arriving for breeding,
protection nests, construction of hatchery, translocation of eggs into hatchery, protection of hatchery,
releasing hatchlings into their natural habitat (the ocean). The activities run during the entire breeding
period from November to April. A total of 2216 nest were protected and 931 hatchings released during the
current year. A survival rate of 42.01 % of hatchlings was achieved thereby contributing to protection of
the depleting marine turtle population.
The Turtle Festival, marking the release of hatchlings into their natural habitat attracted a large number of
nature lovers at Velas beneﬁtting 35 families under the Village Based Tourism program. 60 TCS associates
went to witness the turtle festival bringing them close to nature.

Turtle Nests in hatchery, hatchlings emerged from nests and
releasing of hatchlings into their natural habitat at Velas.

Turtle Festival 2014

75

Supply Chain Sustainability
As part of its business sustainability approach, TCS has embarked on a journey of extending its
sustainability responsibility to its supply chain with an expectation that its vendors and contractors
conduct their business in socially and environmentally responsible manner. TCS values the contributions
from its existing and potential supply chain partners in its current and future business growth. The
supply chain sustainability program is directed towards engagement and capacity building where supply
chain partners are required to attain our expected level of HSE performance. This will be done in a phasewise manner through engagement and capacity building where required.
All purchases are categorized into service or product categories and from the top expenditure categories
the vendors with highest volumes are selected. The vendors are further categorized on the risk levels
based on an internally defined parameter matrix. Vendors contributing to 80% of expenditure were
analyzed for their risk level (Very high, High, Medium or Low) and impact on TCS (Direct or Indirect).
Based on the assessment, the engagement model is ascertained with each vendor ranging from regular
audits to bi-annual assessment to desktop reviews.
TCS has communicated its expectations on sustainability to all of its vendors and is currently actively
engaged with the vendors to help them build their sustainability performance to align with TCS
expectations. The Sustainability requirements in the form of the TCS' Supplier Code of Conduct,
Contractor HSE requirements are an integral part of vendor contracts and all vendors must sign-off and
agree to abide by these requirements as a part of the engagement with TCS.
Desktop assessment have been conducted for some vendors where the impact on TCS is indirect
including ICT suppliers and site/process audits/reviews have been conducted for high risk vendors with
direct impact on TCS like hazardous and e-waste recyclers, canteen, facility management and transport
service providers. Over the last year of the supply chain HSE initiative the number of key vendors
complying with mandatory requirements has increased significantly due to the increased awareness and
introduction of structured management systems in their operations.

35
36

76

In the overseas geographies, most of the locations are small sales offices with very less employee strength. A major proportion of associates are based out of
client locations. Hence, we shall report only on the larger delivery centers where we have a significant presence.
Delivery centers across India, Europe (UK, Hungary), Asia Pacific (China, Philippines), Latam (Uruguay, Chile, Mexico)

Appendix A
While TCS has presence in several geographies across the world, more than 90% of the associates are
based out of India geography. We are building capacity to report the environmental performance of all
overseas delivery centers and intend to increase the scope of reporting in a phased manner. This year, we
have continued reporting the environmental performance for three overseas geographies (from 22
offices across 7 countries - UK, Hungary, China, Philippines, Chile, Uruguay and Mexico).
Geography-wise environment performance for FY 2014

36

KPI

India

Europe & UK

Latin America

Asia Pacific

Electricity consumption
(kWh/FTE/month)

197

241

121

140

Carbon Footprint (Scope 1 + Scope 2)
(tCO2e/FTE/annum)

2.02

1.02

0.44

1.22

Water consumption
(Ltrs/FTE/month)

1092

435

537

798

77

GRI INDEX
STANDARD DISCLOSURES PART I: Proﬁle Disclosures
1. Strategy and Analysis
Proﬁle
Disclosure

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

1.1

Statement from the most senior decision-maker
of the organization.

Fully

CEO's message - page 5

1.2

Description of key impacts, risks, and
opportunities.

Fully

Sustainability of Business
Performance - page 24
Definition of content - page 15

2. Organizational Proﬁle
Proﬁle
Disclosure

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

2.1

Name of the organization.

Fully

Organizational profile - page 8

2.2

Primary brands, products, and/or services.

Fully

Organizational profile - page 8

2.3

Operational structure of the organization,
including main divisions, operating companies,
subsidiaries, and joint ventures.

Fully

Structured for Agility - page 28
Business overview - page 8

2.4

Location of organization's headquarters.

Fully

Contacts - page 94

2.5

Number of countries where the organization
operates, and names of countries with either
major operations or that are speciﬁcally relevant
to the sustainability issues covered in the report.

Fully

Global Footprint - page 9

2.6

Nature of ownership and legal form.

Fully

Organizational profile - page 8

2.7

Markets served (including geographic
breakdown, sectors served, and types of
customers/beneﬁciaries).

Fully

Global Footprint - page 9

2.8

Scale of the reporting organization.

Fully

TCS by numbers - page 10

2.9

Signiﬁcant changes during the reporting period
regarding size, structure, or ownership.

Fully

Organizational profile - page 8

2.10

Awards received in the reporting period.

Fully

Awards - pages 11, 12

3. Report Parameters

78

Proﬁle
Disclosure

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

3.1

Reporting period (e.g., ﬁscal/calendar year) for
information provided.

Fully

About the report - page 4

3.2

Date of most recent previous report (if any).

Fully

About the report - page 4

3.3

Reporting cycle (annual, biennial, etc.)

Fully

About the report - page 4

3.4

Contact point for questions regarding the report
or its contents.

Fully

Contacts - page 94

3.5

Process for deﬁning report content.

Fully

Deﬁnition of Content - page 15

3.6

Boundary of the report (e.g., countries, divisions,
subsidiaries, leased facilities, joint ventures,
suppliers). See GRI Boundary Protocol for further
guidance.

Fully

About the report - page 4

3.7

State any speciﬁc limitations on the scope or
boundary of the report (see completeness
principle for explanation of scope).

Fully

About the report - page 4

3.8

Basis for reporting on joint ventures, subsidiaries,
leased facilities, outsourced operations, and
other entities that can signiﬁcantly aﬀect
comparability from period to period and/or
between organizations.

Fully

About the report - page 4

3.9

Data measurement techniques and the bases of
calculations, including assumptions and
techniques underlying estimations applied to the
compilation of the Indicators and other
information in the report. Explain any decisions
not to apply, or to substantially diverge from, the
GRI Indicator Protocols.

Fully

About the report - page 4

3.10

Explanation of the eﬀect of any re-statements of
information provided in earlier reports, and the
reasons for such re-statement
(e.g.,mergers/acquisitions, change of base
years/periods, nature of business, measurement
methods).

Fully

About the report - page 4

3.11

Signiﬁcant changes from previous reporting
periods in the scope, boundary, or measurement
methods applied in the report.

Fully

About the report - page 4

3.12

Table identifying the location of the Standard
Disclosures in the report.

Fully

GRI Index - page 78

3.13

Policy and current practice with regard to
seeking external assurance for the report.

Fully

About the report - page 4

4. Governance, Commitments, and Engagement
Proﬁle
Disclosure

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

4.1

Governance structure of the organization,
including committees under the highest
governance body responsible for speciﬁc tasks,
such as setting strategy or organizational
oversight.

Fully

Corporate Governance page 18 & 19

4.2

Indicate whether the Chair of the highest
governance body is also an executive oﬃcer.

Fully

Avoidance of Conﬂict of interest page 19

4.3

For organizations that have a unitary board
structure, state the number and gender of
members of the highest governance body that
are independent and/or non-executive members.

Fully

Corporate Governance page 18 & 19

4.4

Mechanisms for shareholders and employees to
provide recommendations or direction to the
highest governance body.

Fully

Corporate Governance page 18 & 19

79

80

4.5

Linkage between compensation for members of
the highest governance body, senior managers,
and executives (including departure
arrangements), and the organization's
performance (including social and
environmental performance).

Fully

Corporate Governance page 18 & 19

4.6

Processes in place for the highest governance
body to ensure conﬂicts of interest are avoided.

Fully

Avoidance of Conﬂict of interest page 19

4.7

Process for determining the composition,
qualiﬁcations, and expertise of the members of
the highest governance body and its
committees, including any consideration of
gender and other indicators of diversity.

Fully

Corporate Governance page 18 & 19

4.8

Internally developed statements of mission or
values, codes of conduct, and principles relevant
to economic, environmental, and social
performance and the status of their
implementation.

Fully

Mission and Values - page 8

4.9

Procedures of the highest governance body for
overseeing the organization's identiﬁcation and
management of economic, environmental, and
social performance, including relevant risks and
opportunities, and adherence or compliance
with internationally agreed standards, codes of
conduct, and principles.

Fully

Board Oversight of Sustainability
Agenda - page 20

4.10

Processes for evaluating the highest governance
body's own performance, particularly with
respect to economic, environmental, and social
performance.

Fully

Corporate Governance - page 18

4.11

Explanation of whether and how the
precautionary approach or principle is addressed
by the organization.

Fully

Environmental Sustainability
UNGC Principle 7 - page 56

4.12

Externally developed economic, environmental,
and social charters, principles, or other initiatives
to which the organization subscribes or
endorses.

Fully

Corporate Governance page 18 & 19

4.13

Memberships in associations (such as industry
associations) and/or national/international
advocacy organizations in which the
organization: * Has positions in governance
bodies; * Participates in projects or committees; *
Provides substantive funding beyond routine
membership dues; or * Views membership as
strategic.

Fully

Stakeholder Engagement page 13

4.14

List of stakeholder groups engaged by the
organization.

Fully

Stakeholder Engagement 13

4.15

Basis for identiﬁcation and selection of
stakeholders with whom to engage.

Fully

Stakeholder Engagement page 13

4.16

Approaches to stakeholder engagement,
including frequency of engagement by type and
by stakeholder group.

Fully

Stakeholder Engagement page 13

4.17

Key topics and concerns that have been raised
through stakeholder engagement, and how the
organization has responded to those key topics
and concerns, including through its reporting.

Fully

Deﬁnition of Content - page 15

page

STANDARD DISCLOSURES PART II: Disclosures on Management Approach (DMAs)
G3.1 DMAs

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

DMA EC

Disclosure on Management Approach EC

Aspects

Economic performance

Fully

TCS by numbers - page 10
Competitive compensation model page 38

Market presence

Fully

Local Recruitment outside India page 38 & 39
Local subcontractors - page 36

Indirect economic impacts

Fully

Direct and Indirect economic impact page 45
Corporate Social Responsibility page 46

DMA EN

Disclosure on Management Approach EN

Aspects

Materials

Fully

Paper Management Initiative page 68

Energy

Fully

Carbon & energy management page 59

Water

Fully

Water Performance - page 65 & 66

Biodiversity

Fully

Biodiversity Conservation and
Enhancement - page 74 & 75

Emissions, eﬄuents and waste

Fully

Waste management - page 67 & 68

Products and services

Fully

Sustainability in Marketing - page 30

Compliance

Fully

Ethics and Compliance - page 21

Transport

Fully

GHG Emissions (Carbon Footprint) page 64

Overall

Fully

Environmental Sustainability - page 56

DMA LA

Disclosure on Management Approach LA

Aspects

Employment

Fully

Diversifying the Talent Pool - page 34
Talent Retention - page 37

Labor/management relations

Fully

Competitive Compensation Model page 38 & 39
Our Workforce - page 33

Occupational health and safety

Fully

Occupational Health and Safety page 42

Training and education

Fully

Learning & Development - page 36

Diversity and equal opportunity

Fully

Diversifying the talent pool - page 34
Our Workforce - page 33

Equal remuneration for women and men

Fully

Competitive Compensation Model page 38 & 39

81

STANDARD DISCLOSURES PART II: Disclosures on Management Approach (DMAs)
G3.1 DMAs

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

DMA HR

Disclosure on Management Approach HR

Aspects

Investment and procurement practices

Fully

Commitment to Human Rights - page 40

Non-discrimination

Fully

Commitment to Human Rights - page 40

Freedom of association and collective
bargaining

Fully

Our Workforce - page 33

Child labor

Fully

Commitment to Human Rights - page 40

Prevention of forced and compulsory labor

Fully

Commitment to Human Rights - page 40

Security practices

Fully

Commitment to Human Rights - page 40

Indigenous rights

Fully

Commitment to Human Rights - page 40

Assessment

Fully

Commitment to Human Rights - page 40

Remediation

Fully

Commitment to Human Rights - page 40

DMA SO

Disclosure on Management Approach SO

Aspects

Local communities

Fully

Corporate Social Responsibility - page 46
Direct and Indirect Economic Impact page 45

Corruption

Fully

Serving as an Ethical Exemplar - page 23

Public policy

Fully

Apolitical Stance - page 14

Anti-competitive behavior

Fully

Ethics and Compliance - page 21

Compliance

Fully

Ethics and Compliance - page 21

DMA PR

Disclosure on Management Approach PR

Aspects

Customer health and safety

Fully

Brand Building - page 29

Product and service labelling

Fully

Brand Building - page 29

Marketing communications

Fully

Brand Building - page 29

Customer privacy

Fully

Information Security and Data Privacy page 26 & 27

Compliance

Fully

Ethics and Compliance - page 21

STANDARD DISCLOSURES PART III: Performance Indicators
Economic
Indicator

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

Fully

TCS by numbers - page 10
Competitive compensation model page 38 & 39

Economic performance
EC1

82

Direct economic value generated and
distributed, including revenues, operating
costs, employee compensation, donations and
other community investments, retained
earnings, and payments to capital providers
and governments.

EC2

Financial implications and other risks and
opportunities for the organization's activities
due to climate change.

Fully

Environmental Sustainability
UNGC Principle 7 - page 56

EC3

Coverage of the organization's deﬁned beneﬁt
plan obligations.

Fully

Competitive Compensation Model page 38 & 39

EC4

Signiﬁcant ﬁnancial assistance received from
government.

Fully

Financial Sustainability - page 31

Market presence
EC5

Range of ratios of standard entry level wage
by gender compared to local minimum wage
at signiﬁcant locations of operation.

Fully

Competitive Compensation Model page 38 & 39

EC6

Policy, practices, and proportion of spending
on locally-based suppliers at signiﬁcant
locations of operation.

Fully

Local subcontractors - page 36
Our Workforce - page 33

EC7

Procedures for local hiring and proportion of
senior management hired from the local
community at signiﬁcant locations of
operation.

Fully

Local Recruitment outside India
UNGC Principle 6 - page 36

Indirect economic impacts
EC8

Development and impact of infrastructure
investments and services provided primarily
for public beneﬁt through commercial, inkind, or pro bono engagement.

Fully

Corporate Social Responsibility - page 46

EC9

Understanding and describing signiﬁcant
indirect economic impacts, including the
extent of impacts.

Fully

Direct and Indirect economic impact page 45

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

EN1

Materials used by weight or volume.

Fully

Carbon & energy management
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 59

EN2

Percentage of materials used that are recycled
input materials.

Fully

Paper Management Initiative
UNGC Principle 8 & 9 - page 68

EN3

Direct energy consumption by primary energy
source.

Fully

Carbon & energy management
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 59

EN4

Indirect energy consumption by primary
source.

Fully

Carbon & energy management
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 59

EN5

Energy saved due to conservation and
eﬃciency improvements.

Fully

Green Buildings
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 60

EN6

Initiatives to provide energy-eﬃcient or
renewable energy based products and
services, and reductions in energy
requirements as a result of these initiatives.

Fully

TCS EcoSustainability Solutions page 31& 32
Carbon & energy management
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 59

EN7

Initiatives to reduce indirect energy
consumption and reductions achieved.

Fully

Energy & Carbon management
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 59

Environmental
Indicator

Materials

Energy

83

Water
EN8

Total water withdrawal by source.

Fully

Water Performance
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 65 & 66

EN9

Water sources signiﬁcantly aﬀected by
withdrawal of water.

Fully

Water Performance
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 65 & 66

EN10

Percentage and total volume of water recycled
and reused.

Fully

Sewage Treatment and Reuse
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 67

EN11

Location and size of land owned, leased,
managed in, or adjacent to, protected areas
and areas of high biodiversity value outside
protected areas.

Fully

Biodiversity Conservation &
Enhancement
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 74 & 75

EN12

Description of signiﬁcant impacts of activities,
products, and services on biodiversity in
protected areas and areas of high biodiversity
value outside protected areas.

Fully

Biodiversity Conservation &
Enhancement
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 74 &75

EN13

Habitats protected or restored.

Fully

Biodiversity Conservation &
Enhancement
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 74 & 75

EN14

Strategies, current actions, and future plans
for managing impacts on biodiversity.

Fully

Biodiversity Conservation &
Enhancement
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 74 & 75

EN15

Number of IUCN Red List species and national
conservation list species with habitats in
areas aﬀected by operations, by level of
extinction risk.

Fully

Biodiversity Conservation &
Enhancement
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 74 & 75

Biodiversity

Emissions, eﬄuents and waste

84

EN16

Total direct and indirect greenhouse gas
emissions by weight.

Fully

GHG Emissions (Carbon Footprint)
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 59

EN17

Other relevant indirect greenhouse gas
emissions by weight.

Fully

Scope 3 carbon footprint
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 64

EN18

Initiatives to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
and reductions achieved.

Fully

GHG Emissions (Carbon Footprint)
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 59

EN19

Emissions of ozone-depleting substances by
weight.

Fully

Ozone depleting substances
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 65

EN20

NOx, SOx, and other signiﬁcant air emissions
by type and weight.

Fully

Other emissions
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 65

EN21

Total water discharge by quality and
destination.

Fully

Sewage Treatment and Reuse
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 66 & 67

EN22

Total weight of waste by type and disposal
method.

Fully

Waste Management
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 67

EN23

Total number and volume of signiﬁcant spills.

Fully

Hazardous Waste Management - page 69

EN24

Weight of transported, imported, exported, or
treated waste deemed hazardous under the
terms of the Basel Convention Annex I, II, III,
and VIII, and percentage of transported waste
shipped internationally.

Fully

Hazardous Waste Management - page 69

EN25

Identity, size, protected status, and
biodiversity value of water bodies and related
habitats signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the reporting
organization's discharges of water and runoﬀ.

Fully

Sewage Treatment and Reuse page 66 & 67

Products and services
EN26

Initiatives to mitigate environmental impacts
of products and services, and extent of impact
mitigation.

Fully

Sustainability in Marketing
UNGC Principle 8 & 9 - page 30

EN27

Percentage of products sold and their
packaging materials that are reclaimed by
category.

Fully

Sustainability in Marketing
UNGC Principle 8 & 9 - page 30

Monetary value of signiﬁcant ﬁnes and total
number of non-monetary sanctions for noncompliance with environmental laws and
regulations.

Fully

Environmental Sustainability
UNGC Principle 7 - page 56

Signiﬁcant environmental impacts of
transporting products and other goods and
materials used for the organization's
operations, and transporting members of the
workforce.

Fully

GHG Emissions (Carbon Footprint)
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 59

Total environmental protection expenditures
and investments by type.

Fully

Environmental Sustainability
UNGC Principle 7 & 8 - page 56

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

LA1

Total workforce by employment type,
employment contract, and region, broken
down by gender.

Fully

Our Workforce - page 33

LA2

Total number and rate of new employee hires
and employee turnover by age group, gender,
and region.

Fully

Talent acquisition
UNGC Principle 6 - page 34 & 35

LA3

Beneﬁts provided to full-time employees that
are not provided to temporary or part-time
employees, by major operations.

Fully

Competitive Compensation Model page 38

LA15

Return to work and retention rates after
parental leave, by gender.

Fully

Talent retention - page 37

Compliance
EN28

Transport
EN29

Overall
EN30

Social: Labor Practices and Decent Work
Indicator

Employment

Labor/management relations
LA4

Percentage of employees covered by
collective bargaining agreements.

Fully

Our Workforce - page 33

LA5

Minimum notice period(s) regarding
signiﬁcant operational changes, including
whether it is speciﬁed in collective
agreements.

Fully

Our Workforce
UNGC Principle 3- page 33

Fully

Occupational Health and Safety
UNGC Principle 1 - page 42

Occupational health and safety
LA6

Percentage of total workforce represented in
formal joint management-worker health and
safety committees that help monitor and
advise on occupational health and safety
programs.

85

LA7

Rates of injury, occupational diseases, lost
days, and absenteeism, and number of workrelated fatalities by region and by gender.

Fully

Injury Data
UNGC Principle 1 - page 43

LA8

Education, training, counseling, prevention,
and risk-control programs in place to assist
workforce members, their families, or
community members regarding serious
diseases.

Fully

Occupational Health and Safety
UNGC Principle 1 - page 42

LA9

Health and safety topics covered in formal
agreements with trade unions.

Fully

Occupational Health and Safety
UNGC Principle 1 - page 42

Training and education
LA10

Average hours of training per year per
employee by gender, and by employee
category.

Fully

Learning & Development - page 36 & 37

LA11

Programs for skills management and lifelong
learning that support the continued
employability of employees and assist them in
managing career endings.

Fully

Learning & Development - page 36 & 37

LA12

Percentage of employees receiving regular
performance and career development
reviews, by gender.

Fully

Career Development - page 38

Fully

Corporate Governance - page 18
Diversifying the talent pool
UNGC Principle 6 - page 38

Fully

Competitive Compensation Model
UNGC Principle 6 - page 42

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

Diversity and equal opportunity
LA13

Composition of governance bodies and
breakdown of employees per employee
category according to gender, age group,
minority group membership, and other
indicators of diversity.

Equal remuneration for women and men
LA14

Ratio of basic salary and remuneration of
women to men by employee category, by
signiﬁcant locations of operation.

Social: Human Rights
Indicator

Disclosure

Investment and procurement practices

86

HR1

Percentage and total number of signiﬁcant
investment agreements and contracts that
include clauses incorporating human rights
concerns, or that have undergone human
rights screening.

Fully

Commitment to Human Rights
UNGC Principles 1-6 - page 40

HR2

Percentage of signiﬁcant suppliers,
contractors and other business partners that
have undergone human rights screening, and
actions taken.

Fully

Commitment to Human Rights
UNGC Principles 1-6 - page 40

HR3

Total hours of employee training on policies
and procedures concerning aspects of human
rights that are relevant to operations,
including the percentage of employees
trained.

Fully

Commitment to Human Rights
UNGC Principles 1-6 - page 40

Non-discrimination
HR4

Total number of incidents of discrimination
and corrective actions taken.

Fully

Commitment to Human Rights
UNGC Principles 1-6 - page 40

Operations and signiﬁcant suppliers identiﬁed
in which the right to exercise freedom of
association and collective bargaining may be
violated or at signiﬁcant risk, and actions
taken to support these rights.

Fully

Commitment to Human Rights
- page 40

Operations and signiﬁcant suppliers identiﬁed
as having signiﬁcant risk for incidents of child
labor, and measures taken to contribute to the
eﬀective abolition of child labor.

Fully

Commitment to Human Rights
UNGC Principles 1, 2 & 5 - page 40

Fully

Commitment to Human Rights
UNGC Principles 1,2 & 4 - page 40

Fully

Commitment to Human Rights
UNGC Principles 1 & 2 - page 40

Total number of incidents of violations
involving rights of indigenous people and
actions taken.

Fully

Commitment to Human Rights
- page 40

Percentage and total number of operations
that have been subject to human rights
reviews and/or impact assessments.

Fully

Commitment to Human Rights
- page 40

Number of grievances related to human rights
ﬁled, addressed and resolved through formal
grievance mechanisms.

Fully

Commitment to Human Rights
- page 40

Disclosure

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

Fully

Corporate Social Responsibility - page 46

Freedom of association and collective bargaining
HR5

Child labor
HR6

Prevention of forced and compulsory labor
HR7

Operations and signiﬁcant suppliers identiﬁed
as having signiﬁcant risk for incidents of
forced or compulsory labor, and measures to
contribute to the elimination of all forms of
forced or compulsory labor.

Security practices
HR8

Percentage of security personnel trained in
the organization's policies or procedures
concerning aspects of human rights that are
relevant to operations.

Indigenous rights
HR9

Assessment
HR10

Remediation
HR11

Social: Society
Indicator

Local communities
SO1

Percentage of operations with implemented
local community engagement, impact
assessments, and development programs.

87

SO9

Operations with signiﬁcant potential or actual
negative impacts on local communities.

Fully

Corporate Social Responsibility - page 46

SO10

Prevention and mitigation measures
implemented in operations with signiﬁcant
potential or actual negative impacts on local
communities.

Fully

Corporate Social Responsibility - page 46

SO2

Percentage and total number of business units
analyzed for risks related to corruption.

Fully

Serving as an Ethical Exemplar
UNGC Principle 10 - page 23

SO3

Percentage of employees trained in
organization's anti-corruption policies and
procedures.

Fully

Serving as an Ethical Exemplar
UNGC Principle 10 - page 23

SO4

Actions taken in response to incidents of
corruption.

Fully

Serving as an Ethical Exemplar
UNGC Principle 10 - page 23

SO5

Public policy positions and participation in
public policy development and lobbying.

Fully

Apolitical Stance - page 14

SO6

Total value of ﬁnancial and in-kind
contributions to political parties, politicians,
and related institutions by country.

Fully

Apolitical Stance - page 14

Total number of legal actions for anticompetitive behavior, anti-trust, and
monopoly practices and their outcomes.

Fully

Ethics and Compliance - page 21

Monetary value of signiﬁcant ﬁnes and total
number of non-monetary sanctions for noncompliance with laws and regulations.

Fully

Ethics and Compliance - page 21

Level of
reporting

Location of disclosure

Corruption

Public policy

Anti-competitive behavior
So7

Compliance
SO8

Social: Product Responsibility
Indicator

Disclosure

Investment and procurement practices
PR1

Life cycle stages in which health and safety
impacts of products and services are assessed
for improvement, and percentage of
signiﬁcant products and services categories
subject to such procedures.

Fully

Sustainability in Marketing - page 30

PR2

Total number of incidents of non-compliance
with regulations and voluntary codes
concerning health and safety impacts of
products and services during their life cycle,
by type of outcomes.

Fully

Sustainability in Marketing - page 30

Fully

Sustainability in Marketing - page 30

Product and service labelling
PR3

88

Type of product and service information
required by procedures, and percentage of
signiﬁcant products and services subject to
such information requirements.

PR4

Total number of incidents of non-compliance
with regulations and voluntary codes
concerning product and service information
and labeling, by type of outcomes.

Fully

Sustainability in Marketing - page 30

PR5

Practices related to customer satisfaction,
including results of surveys measuring
customer satisfaction.

Fully

Stakeholder Engagement - page 13

Marketing communications
PR6

Programs for adherence to laws, standards,
and voluntary codes related to marketing
communications, including advertising,
promotion, and sponsorship.

Fully

Brand Building - page 29

PR7

Total number of incidents of non-compliance
with regulations and voluntary codes
concerning marketing communications,
including advertising, promotion, and
sponsorship by type of outcomes.

Fully

Brand Building - page 29

Total number of substantiated complaints
regarding breaches of customer privacy and
losses of customer data.

Fully

Information Security and Data Privacy
UNGC Principle 1 - page 26 & 27

Monetary value of signiﬁcant ﬁnes for noncompliance with laws and regulations
concerning the provision and use of products
and services.

Fully

Brand Building - page 29

Customer privacy
PR8

Compliance
PR9

89

EXTERNAL ASSURANCE

90

EXTERNAL ASSURANCE

91

EXTERNAL ASSURANCE

92

GRI CERTIFICATE.

93

CONTACT
Corporate Headquarters
TCS House
Raveline Street
Fort Mumbai 400 001
Maharashtra
India
Phone 6778 9999 | Fax 6778 9000 | www.tcs.com
Please email any feedback/queries to corporate.sustainability@tcs.com

94

About Tata Consultancy Services (TCS)
Tata Consultancy Services is an IT services, consulting and business solutions organization that
delivers real results to global business, ensuring a level of certainty no other firm can match.
TCS offers a consulting-led, integrated portfolio of IT and IT-enabled infrastructure, engineering
and assurance services. This is delivered through its unique Global Network Delivery ModelTM,
recognized as the benchmark of excellence in software development. A part of the Tata Group,
India’s largest industrial conglomerate, TCS has a global footprint and is listed on the National
Stock Exchange and Bombay Stock Exchange in India.

IT Services
Business Solutions
Consulting
All content / information present here is the exclusive property of Tata Consultancy Services Limited (TCS). The content / information contained here is
correct at the time of publishing. No material from here may be copied, modified, reproduced, republished, uploaded, transmitted, posted or distributed in
any form without prior written permission from TCS. Unauthorized use of the content / information appearing here may violate copyright, trademark and
other applicable laws, and could result in criminal or civil penalties.
Copyright © 2014 Tata Consultancy Services Limited

TCS Design Services I M I 09 I 14

For more information, visit us at www.tcs.com

