Corporate Sustainability Report

2015 | 2016

Table of Contents

About the Report

4

CEO’s Message

5

Organization Proﬁle

10

Stakeholder Engagement and Materiality Deﬁnition

16

Our Sustainability Strategy and Corporate Governance

24

Our Marketplace

30

Our Workforce

39

Our Community

52

Our Environment

62

GRI G4 Content Index

81

External Assurance

86

Contact

92

About the Report
TCS publishes Sustainability Reports annually. The last report published was for the ﬁnancial year
2014-15.This is TCS' Tenth Sustainability Report, for ﬁnancial year 2015-16 (April to March). It has
been prepared in conformance with the G4 Sustainability Reporting Guidelines published by the
Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) which focuses on the principles of materiality and stakeholder
inclusiveness and is in accordance with the 'Core' option. The report addresses the key
sustainability topics gleaned through interactions with the diﬀerent stakeholder groups. These
topics cover the full range of material economic, social and environmental impacts of the
organization. The report boundaries and exclusions are provided below:

Data

Basis

Exclusions

Financial

TCS' Consolidated,
Global Operations

None

Human
Resources

TCS Ltd.'s global
operations, including
wholly owned
subsidiaries

Subsidiaries not wholly
owned by TCS
(accounting for 1.9% of
consolidated headcount).¹

Delivery centers in
India and UK,
Hungary, Singapore,
China, Philippines,
Brazil, Chile, Uruguay
and Mexico.

Remaining delivery
centers outside India
(accounting for
approx. 4% of
headcount)²

Environmental

Data measurement techniques and the bases of calculations and estimates are furnished in the
relevant areas of the report. The Company does not believe there is any substantial divergence
from the GRI Indicator Protocols.
There have been no signiﬁcant changes from the last reporting period in the scope, boundary,
or methodology for data analysis applied in the report. There has been no restatement of
information provided in earlier reports. The data is sourced from Ultimatix, the Company's core
enterprise platform which runs all internal processes in HR, Finance and Project Management
and is also the portal for employees to provide their opinions and feedback. All the data is
audited by relevant third party auditors as part of ISO and ﬁnancial audits.
This report has been externally assured by KPMG. The scope and basis of the assurance have
been described in the assurance letter issued by KPMG. No other relationship exists between
TCS and KPMG.

G4-17, G4-18, G4-22,
G4-23, G4-28, G4-29,G4-30,
G4-32, G4-33
4

1 List of subsidiaries available on Page 171 of the Annual Report http://www.tcs.com/investors/Documents/Annual%20Reports/TCS_Annual_Report_2015-2016.pdf
2 List of delivery centers is available at: http://www.tcs.com/worldwide/india/locations/oﬃce-locations/Pages/default.aspx

CEO's Message
Dear Stakeholders,
I am happy to connect with you on the occasion of the publication of TCS' Corporate
Sustainability Report. This is our 10th edition of the Report since 2007.
I am pleased to reaﬃrm our support to the Ten Principles of the United Nations Global
Compact in the areas of Human Rights, Labour, Environment and Anti-Corruption.
On the business front, we concluded FY16 with a strong overall performance for the
ﬁnancial year with total revenues of Rs. 1.086 trillion, up 14.8%.
Digital technology has had a profound impact which has presented tremendous opportunities for
the future. This, at the same time, is forcing every business to reimagine and rethink their products,
services and business models. We have been making signiﬁcant investments in digital
technologies in terms of training & talent development through our immersive Digital Learning
Platform; building innovation labs and customer collaboration labs and investing in platforms and
automation products which are being appreciated by customers. Machine learning and Neural
Automation will have a strong impact on business processes. Our research eﬀorts over the last four
years in this area culminated in the launch of IgnioTM earlier this year, which is receiving great
interest from our customers.
We continue to focus on innovation both from the point of view of future business models
as well as speciﬁc industry and technology solutions that will make a huge impact on
our customers.
This year, we had our highest all-time employee addition with a gross addition of 90,182
employees – giving us a diverse base of over 350,000 professionals from 129 nationalities. In order
to equip all our employees with right skills in the digital world we launched our Digital Learning
Platform. In the past 12 months over 120,000 TCSers have developed skills in new technologies
using the TCS Digital Learning Platform.
We consolidated our position among the top global IT brands and were recognised as the fastest
growing IT Services brand globally over the last ﬁve years, scoring highly on measures like
familiarity, loyalty, staﬀ satisfaction and corporate reputation. TCS was ranked among the Forbes
most innovative companies for the eighth consecutive year. We were also ranked as a UK
Superbrand for the second year in a row. Among other major accolades, TCS ranked #1 in Europe
for Customer Satisfaction by Whitelane Research for the third year in a row. We were also
recognised as a Top Employer globally across 24 countries by the Top Employers Institute - one in
only eight organisations worldwide to have achieved this status.
Beyond business, we continue to enhance our footprint in the communities where we operate. In
North America, our STEM technology platforms have brought together over 250 organizations in
support of mentoring over 750,000 girls, young women and students from underrepresented
minorities. In UK, we created 1,000 internships for young British university graduates to spend a
year, training and working at TCS centres across India. In a diﬀerent type of intervention to enable
education of girl students in India, TCS built new sanitation facilities in 1,472 schools. TCS
partnered with All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) to transform the Out Patient
Department (OPD) process using technology interventions to improve access to healthcare and
help treat patients eﬀectively and eﬃciently.

G4-1

5

...CEO's Message
To underline our serious commitment to advancement in Computer Science we made a signiﬁcant
contribution for setting up infrastructure at the Carnegie Mellon University. We are also setting up
a Research Centre at IIIT Hyderabad and now have a dedicated team to sharpen our collaboration
with leading technology institutions to promote market driven innovation.
In the ﬁrst anniversary of Purpose4Life, I am very proud to say that we saw an overwhelming
participation from TCSers globally, contributing over 600,000 hours of volunteering to make a
positive impact in their communities. Fit4Life continues to grow with active participation of over
80,000 employees.
Safety of our employees remains an important focus for us. Our Safety First initiative launched last
year continues to promote a safety culture among our associates. This year, several branch led
programs impacted more than 250,000 employees across the globe. Through these programs we
take more signiﬁcant steps for building a stronger safety culture within TCS.
We continue to work on our environmental sustainability targets and continually reduce our
environmental impact. With a strong focus on energy eﬃciency, green infrastructure and green IT,
we strive towards reducing our speciﬁc energy and carbon footprint. This year, we have
strengthened our commitment to promoting environmental suitability as we expand our Energy
Management Programme. We have deployed extensive smart metering which is a leading edge,
scalable, cloud based IoT platform in 107 sites within our India operations. This has resulted in
absolute energy savings of ~12.5 million kwh. We continue to drive water eﬃciency at our
premises through wastewater treatment and closed loop recycling to reduce our demand on fresh
water, working towards our long term target of water neutrality. Through eﬀective waste
management aligned to the 3R principle, we aspire to achieve zero waste discharge at all our
campuses.
With all our investments we are well positioned to capture growth opportunities in the market and
make a huge impact on customers and society.

Regards,
N. Chandrasekaran
CEO & MD, TCS

6

Organization
Profile

Organization Profile
Tata Consultancy Services is an IT services, business solutions, and Business Process Services (BPS)
organization that delivers real results to global businesses, with a high level of certainty. TCS oﬀers a
consulting-led, complete and integrated portfolio of IT and IT-enabled services delivered through its unique
Global Network Delivery Model (GNDM™), recognized as an industry benchmark of excellence in distributed
software development.
Founded in 1968 as part of the Tata group, TCS is headquartered in Mumbai, India and is a public limited
company³, listed on the National Stock Exchange (NSE) and Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) in India. In FY 2016,
we reported consolidated revenues of USD 16.5 billion.

MISSION AND VALUES
It is our mission to continue to help customers
achieve their business objectives with our services.
TCS' core set of values underpin all activities in the
company and these include leadership with trust,
integrity, excellence, respect for the individual, and
learning/sharing.

BUSINESS OVERVIEW
TCS is an IT services, consulting and business solutions
organization that delivers measurable results to global
businesses, ensuring a level of certainty no other ﬁrm
can match. We oﬀer a consulting-led, integrated
portfolio of IT, BPS, IT infrastructure, engineering, and
assurance services. In addition, we have launched
several new service oﬀerings around mobility, social
computing, Big Data and the cloud. This is delivered
through its unique Global Network Delivery Model™,
recognized as the benchmark of excellence in
software development.
We have built strong domain capabilities in a range of
industry verticals, positioning ourselves as a strategic
partner capable of reliably delivering innovative
technology-led solutions to business problems. The
key industry verticals we service are: Banking,
Financial Services, and Insurance (BFSI); Retail and
Consumer Packaged Goods; Telecom; Media and
Entertainment; High Tech; Manufacturing; Life
Sciences and Healthcare (LSHC); Energy Resources and
Utilities (ERU); Travel, Transportation, and Hospitality
(TTH); and government sectors. Exhibit 1 illustrates
our revenue break-up by industry.

G4-3, G4-4, G4-7, G4-13

10

3 Please refer to our FY2016 Annual Report for details of the shareholding pattern (page 121), changes in the capital structure during
FY2016 (page 158) and the complete list of subsidiaries (pages 232-234). Our Annual Report can be accessed on:
http://www.tcs.com/investors/Documents/Annual%20Reports/TCS_Annual_Report_2015-2016.pdf

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

3.6%

2.5%

3.9%
BFSI

4.1%

Retail and Distribution
Manufacturing

5.7%

Telecom
Life Sciences and Healthcare

40.6%

7.1%

Hi Tech

8.4%

Energy and Utilities
Travel and Hospitality

10.1%

14.1%

Media & Entertainment
Others

Exhibit 1: Revenue Break-Up by Industry Vertical

Global Footprint
TCS has been steadily expanding its geographic footprint. In addition to the traditional markets for its
services – North America, United Kingdom, and Continental Europe, we have been expanding our presence
in emerging markets like Asia-Paciﬁc (APAC), India, Latin America (LATAM), and Middle East and Africa (MEA).
As of March 31, 2016, TCS has 229 oﬃces across 55 countries. Exhibit 2 displays the break-up
of our oﬃces by geography. In FY16, we expanded our global footprint with 25 new oﬃces in
6 countries.

95 26 13 29 33 26
India

North
America

LATAM

UK &
Ireland

Europe

APAC

7
MEA

Exhibit 2: TCS Offices across the Globe
TCS' GNDM™ is characterized by a global, interconnected workforce, integrated processes
and a robust, multi-tiered collaboration and communication infrastructure, with a global delivery footprint,
which covers over 145 solution centers across 19 countries.

G4-6, G4-8, G4-9, G4-13

11

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

6 3
UK

7

Europe

N. America

2 111India 8

8

Latin
America

MEA

APAC

Exhibit 3: Our GNDMTM Centers around the World
GNDM™ leverages our diverse technical, language, and domain-speciﬁc capabilities to deliver custom, quality
solutions faster and in compliance with local regulatory requirements and
cultural preferences.
Exhibit 4 illustrates the revenue breakup by geography for FY 2016.

1.9%

2.3%

6.2%

9.5%

North America
UK

11.0%

53.3%

15.8%

Continental Europe
Asia Pacific
India
Latin America
MEA

Exhibit 4: Revenue Breakup by Geography

G4-8

12

TCS by Numbers
Our strategy for longer term growth has been to continually expand addressable market by investing in
newer geographies, newer industry verticals and newer service lines and strengthen and deepen existing
client relationships through a customer centric approach, superior execution that gives clients an experience
of certainty, a full services capability and a scalable global network delivery model (GNDMTM).

$16.5
Bn

26.5%

$3.7
Bn

$1,142.4
Mn

$12.5
Bn

Net
sales

Operating
margin

Net
income

Taxes

Retained
earnings

$13.77
Bn

$75.25
Bn

353,843

129

33.8%

Market
capitalization

Number of
employees
(on March 31,
2016)

Number of
nationalities
in the
workforce

Percentage
of women
in the
workforce

Total
assets

(on March 31,
2016)

90,182

15.5%

829

37

650,226

New hires
in FY 2016

Attrition in
IT services*

Clients
contributing
more than
$1 Mn/year

Clients
contributing
more than
$100 Mn/year

Number of
shareholders

6,12,908

`381.42
crores

45%

43.6%

50%

Volunteering
eﬀort in CSR
(person hours)*

Investment in
CSR initiatives*

Reduction in
per capita
electricity
consumed**

Reduction in
per capita
carbon footprint

Reduction in
per capita
business air
travel emissions**

15%

79.5%

Reduction in
per capita
fresh water
consumption**

Reduction in
per capita
paper
consumption**

(Scope 1 + Scope 2) **

* Excluding subsidiaries
** Reduction given is over baseline year
2007-08 coverage as per Annexure A

G4-9, G4-DMA ECONOMIC,
G4-EC1
13

Awards and Recognition
Key awards and accolades Received in 2015-16

Corporate

n

World's most powerful brand in IT Services Brand Finance

n

Ranked 57 among Top 100 US Brands by
Brand Finance

n

Dun & Bradstreet Corporate Award

n

Ranked Number 1 – IDC Financial Insights FinTech Rankings
Top 100

n

Recognized as 'Superbrand' by Superbrands (UK) list for
business-to-business brands

n

TCS UK and Ireland recognized as 'Company of the Year' by
the Top Employer Institute

n

Ranked Number 1 in Dataquest's Top 20 list of Indian
IT companies

n

Winner of Make in India Awards for Excellence in the
IT services category

n

Winner of Best Practice in Developing Future Leaders Award
at the Best Leadership Development Practices of Asia Awards

Leadership
N Chandrasekaran:
n

Recognition from
Partners

14

Ranked 'Best CEO', Technology/ IT Services & Software Sector Institutional Investor's 2015 All-Asia Executive Team rankings

n

Winner of Qimpro Platinum Standard Award 2015 (Business)

n

One of Business Today's Best CEOs (IT & ITES)

n

Appointed as a part-time non-official director on the central
board of the RBI

n

SAP Pinnacle award

n

Oracle Excellence Award for Specialized Partner of the Year –
Asia Paciﬁc, North America

n

#1 ranking for customer satisfaction – Whitelane Research

n

Red Hat's System Integrator Partner of the Year
for North America

n

Hitachi Data System's Global System Integrator
Partner of the Year

n

Fastest Growing SI Partner of the Year for 2015- Expericon

n

Business Transformation Award – Pegasystems Partner
Excellence Awards

n

Winner, IBM Mobile App Throwdown Contest 2015 for
Business Partners

n

GSI Partner of the Year Award at Dell World 2015

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Talent Management

n

Recognized as a Global Top Employer by the Top
Employers Institute

n

Golden Peacock National Training Award

n

Won multiple awards as part of the Global HR Excellence
Awards and Recruiting and Staﬃng Best in Class (RASBIC)
awards - World HRD Congress

n

Number One Best Employer Brand and BPO Organization
of the Year by the World HRD Congress - Global HR
Excellence Awards

n

'Best Places to Work For' and Number One in the BPS
sector - Business Today – People Strong Survey

n

Ranked #64 in the World's Most Innovative Companies list
- Forbes

n

Recognized for the 'Best In House IP Team of the year IT & Technology' at Global IPR Conclave

n

Dow Jones Sustainability Index - World and Emerging
Markets 2015: Bronze Status

n

2015 Silver Stevie Award for Corporate Social
Responsibility

Capability and Innovation

n

Hong Kong Corporate Citizenship Award 2015

n

Mentor Leadership through Technology Award at the
Inaugural MWM Summit 2015

n

Canadian HR Reporter Best Corporate Social
Responsibility Program Award 2015

n

TCS UK & Ireland wins 'Social Responsibility project of the
Year' - Employee Engagement Awards

n

India Sustainability Leadership Award 2015 by World CSR
Day organization in the area of Sustainable Carbon
Management category

n

CII National Award for Excellence in Energy Management
2015 for Deccan Park, Hyderabad

n

CII (Western Region) Best Practices Case Study Award
2015 (Waste Management) in conference on
Sustainability & Inclusive Development

n

Carbon Disclosure Leadership Index (CDLI), India 2015
(fourth year in a row) with a perfect score of 100

Community and Environment

15

Stakeholder Engagement and Materiality Definition

Our Stakeholders
TCS engages with a broad spectrum of stakeholders, internal and external, to understand their concerns and
priorities and use these to guide policy formulation and decision-making. Business considerations largely
govern the decision on which stakeholders to engage with and in what manner and periodicity. Key
stakeholders have been identiﬁed through a stakeholder prioritization exercise undertaken in consultation
with our Company's management. Customers, employees, shareholders, investors, engineering colleges,
staﬃng agencies and other vendors are among the identiﬁed key stakeholders. A stakeholder interaction
exercise with both internal and external stakeholders was undertaken as part of the report development. TCS
is a member of a number of industry bodies like NASSCOM and CII and works closely with these bodies in
shaping policy.
Exhibit 5 describes TCS' stakeholder interaction framework. Some other stakeholders that we closely engage
with, such as industry analysts, equity analysts, and the media, have not been mentioned here because they
are proxies for other named stakeholders – customers, shareholders, and the larger society respectively. TCS
continues to engage with these stakeholder groups on an ongoing basis through a variety of channels.

Stakeholder

Interfacing Group

Customers

Sales/Pre-Sales
Marketing
Delivery teams
Senior management

Employees

Shareholders

G4-16, G4-18, G4-24, G4-25,
G4-26, G4-27
16

HR
Senior Management

Investor Relations
Company Secretary
Senior Management

Engagement Types by Frequency
Ÿ

As needed: Project-related calls and meetings, PMRs,
relationship meetings, visits, responses to RFI/RFPs,
sponsored events, mailers, newsletters, brochures

Ÿ

Continuous: TCS website, customer portal

Ÿ

Half-yearly: Customer satisfaction surveys⁴

Ÿ

Annual: Customer Summit, Innovation Day

Ÿ

As needed: Town halls, roadshows, project/operations
reviews, videoconferences, audio conference calls, PEEP,
PROPEL (employee forum), one-on-one counseling

Ÿ

Monthly: @TCS (in-house magazine)

Ÿ

Continuous: TCS website, Ultimatix Notice Board, CEO
Connect, CTO Blog, Corporate Corner, JustAsk, IdeaMAX,
dipstick surveys, grievance redressal system

Ÿ

Annual: PULSE (employee feedback survey),
long service awards, sales meet, Blitz (business
planning meet)

Ÿ

As needed: Press releases and press conferences, email
advisories, facility visits, in-person meetings, investor
conferences, non-deal roadshows, conference calls

Ÿ

Quarterly: Financial statements in Indian GAAP and
IFRS, earnings call, exchange notifications, press
conference

Ÿ

Continuous: Investors Page on TCS website

Ÿ

Annual: Annual General Meeting, Annual Report

4 The survey is done at an account-level and measures TCS' performance on various parameters across multiple dimensions.

Stakeholder

Interfacing Group

Academic Institutions

HR
Senior Management
CTO

Head Hunters,
Staffing Firms,
Other Suppliers

HR
Business Units
Procurement

Partners and
Collaborators

Alliance Management
CTO

Industry bodies

Governments

Ÿ
Ÿ

NGOs and Local
Communities
Society at large

Corporate Affairs
Finance
Senior Management
Government Business
Unit
Corporate Affairs
HSE/Finance Teams
CSR Team
Senior Management
CSR Team
Volunteers
Corporate
Communications
Team
Senior Management

Engagement Types by Frequency
Ÿ

As needed: Academic Interface Program, Co-Innovation
Network (COIN™) meetings

Ÿ

Continuous: TCS website, Academic portal

Ÿ

Annual: Sangam (high-level academic conference),
campus recruitment

Ÿ

One-time: RFIs/RFPs, empanelment process

Ÿ

As needed: Transactional meetings,
periodic reviews, surveys

Ÿ

As needed: Meetings/calls, COIN meetings, visits,
partner events

Ÿ

Monthly: Conference calls

Ÿ

Quarterly: Business reviews

Ÿ

Annual: Partner events

Ÿ

As needed: Conferences and seminars, working
committee meetings, surveys, meetings

Ÿ

Annual: Conferences, summits

Ÿ

As needed: Governance RFIs/RFPs, presentations,
project meetings, reviews, calls and meetings, surveys,
consultative sessions

Ÿ

Continuous: TCS website

Ÿ

As needed: Field visits, due diligence, calls and
meetings, conferences and seminars, surveys, press
releases, press conferences, media interviews and
quotes, sponsored events
Continuous: TCS website

Ÿ

Exhibit 5: TCS' Framework for Interaction with Stakeholders
Stakeholders

Material Topics

Customers

Business knowledge, Delivery capability, Quality, Data privacy and security,
Ethical behavior, Fair business practices

Employees

Safe and comfortable workplace, Engaging assignments, Learning
opportunities, Career development, Compensation structure

Shareholders

Continued revenue growth, Profitability, Cashflows, Corporate Governance,
Transparency and Disclosure, Dividend payouts

Academic Institutions

Job creation, Curriculum enhancement, Internship opportunities, Faculty
development

Vendors, Partners and
Collaborators

Ethical behavior, Fair business practices, Governance, Sustainability of
Demand, Credit-worthiness

Governments / NGOs / Local
Communities

Good governance, Ethics and Compliance, Support for developmental
programs, Job opportunities, Responsible Citizenry

Society at large

Environmental impact

Exhibit 6: Material Topics identified for key Stakeholders

G4-18, G4-24, G4-25,
G4-26, G4-27
17

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Apolitical Stance
While TCS works closely with consultative bodies of various industry associations in advising governments on
policy formulation or advocating changes to policy, the company does not spend on lobbying and maintains
an entirely apolitical stance in line with the Tata Code of Conduct. The company does not support any speciﬁc
political party or candidate for political oﬃce.
Material Topics
The deliberations at the Sustainability Council serve as the foundation for setting the sustainability context
for our Company leading to the determination of material issues. Relevant stakeholder representatives
debated these issues to arrive at the prioritized list reﬂecting signiﬁcant economic, environmental and social
impacts, which allow an assessment of our performance for the reporting period.
As part of the process of prioritizing the Company's material issues, issues speciﬁcally relevant to TCS were
listed based on our current material issues, and an external peer review, as well as taking into consideration
sector speciﬁc issues. These were discussed with both internal and external stakeholders with the objective
of prioritizing the material topics. The internal stakeholders included senior management members and
employees whereas the external stakeholders included suppliers, contractors, NGOs, and academic
institutions.
Each stakeholder group was asked to rank the listed material issues against speciﬁc business parameters to
arrive at the average score for each issue and a stakeholder speciﬁc score. A weighted average was
considered based on the relevance and criticality of each material issue to the respective stakeholder group.
This was further used to arrive at an aggregated score for each material issue from all the stakeholders.
The topics material to TCS have been prioritized through this process and after deliberation by management,
and are listed in Exhibit 7.
Area

Material Topics

Why this is material

Corporate
Governance

Strong leadership and effective corporate governance practices have been the
company's hallmark inherited from the Tata culture and ethos. The company's
philosophy on corporate governance underlines business strategies and ensures
fiscal accountability, ethical corporate behavior, and fairness to all stakeholders,
including regulators, employees, customers, vendors, investors, and the society
at large.

Ethical Behavior
and Business
Practices

TCS emphasizes both the pursuit of technical excellence and the highest
standards of professionalism on the part of the company and its employees.
The Tata Code of Conduct confirms our dedication to integrity, fairness, and
social responsibility.

Delivery
Capability

Our unique Global Network Delivery Model (GNDM™) allows customers to
choose the sourcing strategy best suited to their business needs. We take a
“follow-the-sun” approach, meaning that no matter where our clients' business is
located, we help keep it running 24/7, while providing a seamless experience
across all operations.

Business
Continuity

The company has sustained its commitment to the highest levels of quality, bestin-class service management, robust information security practices, and mature
business continuity processes that have helped achieve significant milestones
during the year.

Profit

G4-18, G4-19, G4-20, G4-21

18

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Area

Material Topics

Why this is material

Working and
Labor
Conditions

The company is focused on providing its 353,843 employees from 129
nationalities across 55 countries a meaningful and compelling environment.
An environment which gives today's diverse, multi-generational, and mobile
workforce the confidence to realize their potential and provide world-class
solutions to customers. This positive and inspiring environment fosters
innovation, stimulates a performance culture, and motivates employees to
develop themselves personally and professionally.

People Learning
Opportunities
and Career
Development

Successful delivery of digital initiatives is contingent on gaining new capabilities
in multiple digital technologies that are evolving at a rapid pace. TCS has
created a world-class Digital Learning Platform – an integrated ecosystem that
combines virtual, physical, and experiential learning with high-quality content
that is available anywhere, anyplace, anytime, and on any device.

Occupational
Health and
Safety

For a people-centric organization like ours, occupational safety, health,
and wellbeing of employees is critical to business. Our commitment towards
providing a healthy and safe work environment to our employees, contractors,
and anyone who comes to our offices forms the bedrock of our safety processes.
We have extended our people focus beyond the workplace to personal safety
through the SafetyFirst initiative, to create a culture of safety among
our employees.

Climate
Change Risks
and
Opportunities

Climate change is a complex global issue interrelated to multiple environmental
aspects. This makes it relevant to businesses either directly or indirectly. TCS
recognizes this link between climate change and business strategy, making this
issue material to us. Driven by the Tata Group Climate Change Policy and TCS'
Environmental Policy, GHG accounting and mitigation are key elements of the
environmental sustainability roadmap (2020).

Electronic
Waste (eWaste)
Planet

As an IT company, TCS is a bulk consumer of electrical and electronic items, which
results in e-waste generation at the end of life of these items. A focused policy
and streamlined processes ensure that this generated e-waste is disposed of
responsibly through government authorized recyclers. Recyclers are periodically
audited to ensure disposal of these assets is under our 'duty for care'.

Green IT/Data
Centers/Office
Buildings

Office infrastructure (buildings and IT assets) is central to any IT company's
operations. TCS' strategy to build 'green' infrastructure and energy efficient
IT infrastructure (including data centers) is a key enabler of its environmental
sustainability roadmap. The company has leveraged opportunities to drive
eco-efficiency in pursuit of its environmental sustainability goals.

Energy
Consumption
and Efficient
Management

The pillars of energy management at TCS are energy efficient office buildings,
Green IT, data center power management, operational energy efficiency, and
renewable energy. Energy is a critical resource for TCS and is a key contributor to
its carbon footprint. Efficient management of energy is important to minimize our
carbon footprint and to drive operational cost efficiency.

Exhibit 7: Topics Material to TCS

G4-18, G4-19, G4-20, G4-21

19

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Aspects

Boundary
of Impact5

Governance structure and
composition

Internal

Highest governance body's
role in setting purpose,
values and strategy

Internal

Performance evaluation of
highest governance body

Internal

Risk management by
highest governance body

Internal

Anti-corruption

Internal

Compliance

Internal

Anti-competitive behavior

Internal

Delivery Capability

No GRI aspect identiﬁed

Internal

Additional

Business Continuity

No GRI aspect identiﬁed

Internal

Additional

Employment

Internal

G4 LA3, LA13

Labor Management
Relations

Internal

G4 LA4

Diversity & Equal
Opportunity

Internal

G4 LA12, 13

Learning Opportunities
and Career
Training and Education
Development

Internal

G4 LA11

Occupational Health
and Safety

Health and Safety

Internal

G4 LA5-8

Climate Change Risks
and Opportunities

GHG Emissions

Internal

G4 EN16-21

Electronic Waste
(e-Waste)

Eﬄuents and Waste

Internal

G4 EN23

Green IT/Data
Centers/Oﬃce
Buildings

Energy

Internal

G4 EN3-7, EN 8-10,
EN16-21, EN22, EN 26

Energy

Internal

Emissions

Internal

Compliance

Internal

Material Topics

Corporate
Governance

Ethical Behavior and
Business Practices

Working and Labor
Conditions

Energy Consumption
and Efficient
Management

Exhibit 8: Boundary of Impact for Material Aspects

G4-18, G4-19, G4-20, G4-21
5 Boundary of Impact: Internal includes all TCS oﬃces and campuses

20

Indicators Covered

G4-34, G4-36

G4-56, G4-57

G4 EN3-7

Corporate
Governance

Our Sustainability Strategy and Corporate Governance
TCS embodies the Tata group's philosophy of building sustainable businesses that are firmly rooted in the
community and demonstrate care for the environment. Towards this, TCS has adopted the 'triple bottom-line'
approach and recognizes that People, Planet, and Profit as the central pillars of corporate sustainability.
Profits

Sustainable
Marketplace

Business
Focus

Governance

Environment
Internal stakeholders
Focus
of sustainability

Environment
Sustainability
Internal & External

Planet

People
Focus

Key elements of sustainability

Sustainable
Communities
Internal & External

Triple Bottom Line

People

Exhibit 9: Our Approach to Sustainability
People: Sustainable Internal and External Communities – Our 353,843 employees are the backbone of
TCS, who actively participate in sustainability initiatives. Externally, we conduct a diverse range of CSR
initiatives in the areas of education and skill building, health, environment, and affirmative action through
volunteering, sponsorships, and pro bono leveraging the company's IT capabilities. In addition, initiatives
focused at promoting supply chain and procurement sustainability ensure that vendors and suppliers are
aligned to our sustainability objectives.
Planet: Environmental Sustainability – From designing sustainable infrastructure and running efficient
operations, to engaging with supply chain partners in green procurement and disposal activities, TCS takes a
holistic approach towards reducing our carbon footprint, waste, and our energy and water consumption. Our
offices as well as IT infrastructure are sustainably designed and built for maximum resource efficiency.
Profit: Sustainable Marketplace – In addition to ensuring sustainability in business performance, our
specialists work across industry verticals with an aim to provide next-generation sustainability services to
customers. Integrating sustainability into business strategies and unlocking environmental efficiencies in the
entire value chain is a significant value add.
Corporate Governance
We foster sustainability with strong corporate governance that oversees business strategies and ensures
fiscal accountability, ethical corporate behavior, and fairness to all stakeholders. Being part of the 148-year
old Tata group which epitomizes sustainability, TCS has inherited a strong legacy of fair, transparent, and
ethical governance, as embodied in the Tata Code of Conduct6 (TCoC).

G4-15, G4-34, G4-36

24

6 The full text of the Tata Code of Conduct is available on: http://www.tcs.com/SiteCollectionDocuments/About%20TCS/
Tata-Code-of-Conduct-2015.pdf)

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Our corporate governance strategy is aligned with the ten principles articulated in the UN Global
Compact, to which TCS is a signatory.
At the top of the governance structure is the Board of Directors⁷ representing the shareholders, and various
committees on the Board, overseeing the Executive Management. TCS has a unitary board structure
consisting of 11 members of whom nine are Non-Executive Directors (including the Chairman) and six are
Independent Directors⁹. Ms. Aarthi Subramanian was appointed as an Executive Director for a period of three
years with effect from March 12, 2015. The composition of the Company's Board and detailed profiles of Board
Members are available on the website.
Aspect

How

Conﬂict of interest between the Board's executive function and the supervisory
function is minimized by making the Chairmanship of the Board a non-executive
role, and keeping it separate from that of the Chief Executive Oﬃcer and
Managing Director.

Avoidance of
Conﬂict of Interest

TCS has a Code of Conduct for Non-Executive Directors, requiring them to always
act in the interest of the company and ensure that any other business or personal
association, which they may have, does not involve any conﬂict of interest with the
operations of the company and their role therein.
Similarly, all employees including the Managing Director and Executive Directors
are prohibited from freelancing or accepting any position of responsibility with or
without remuneration with any other company without TCS' written approval. For
Executive Directors and the Managing Director, such approval must be obtained
from the Board.

TCS does not derive any material revenues (~0.004% of revenues in FY 2016) from
its holding company Tata Sons Limited. Employees and resources (including cash)
are not shared between Group companies.
Intra-group
Transactions

Independent Directors make up half the Board. Dealings with Tata Sons or with a
group company is done on an arms-length basis and have to be approved by the
Board. Transactions, if any, are reviewed closely by the Board to ensure that all
shareholders' interests are protected. All transactions with Tata group companies
are disclosed in TCS' Annual Report (Page 181-183).

7 Details of Board level committees on pages 108 – 115 of the Annual Report:
http://www.tcs.com/investors/Documents/Annual%20Reports/TCS_Annual_Report_2015-2016.pdf
8 A Non-Executive Director is defined as a Director who is not involved in the day-to-day operations of the Company and is not a full-time
employee of the Company
9 An Independent Director is a Non-Executive Director, who (a) does not have any material relationship/ transaction with the Company, its
Directors, Promoters, senior management, holding company and its subsidiaries, (b) Is not related to Promoters/Board/Senior
Management, (c) Has not been an executive of the Company in the past 3 years, (d) Has not been a partner/executive of the Company's
statutory audit/ internal audit firm, legal/consulting firm in the past three years, (e) Has not been a material supplier, service-provider or
customer or a lessor or lessee of the company, (f ) Is not a substantial shareholder i.e. owning 2% or more and (g) Is not less than 21 years
of age
10 http://www.tcs.com/about/corp_facts/board_directors/Pages/default.aspx

G4-36

25

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Aspect

How

To ensure governance focus in business sustainability, our Board of Directors meet
seven-eight times a year instead of the statutory four times. While four of these
meetings are for the review and approval of ﬁnancial results, the remainder is for
more detailed oversight of business, strategy, and sustainability matters.
This ensures that the Board's focus goes beyond ﬁnancial performance and covers
various operational and strategic issues including sustainability aspects, budgets,
industry performance, peer review and competition analysis, overall risk
assessment, performance of subsidiaries, opportunities for organic and inorganic
growth, among others.

Board Oversight of
the Sustainability
Agenda

The CEO is the Director responsible for Sustainability. Oversight of the company's
sustainability strategy is the responsibility of the Sustainability Head, EVP, and
Global Head HR. He is supported by the Sustainability Council and dedicated
teams for Corporate Social Responsibility and Environment, each headed by
highly-qualiﬁed specialists in their respective domains. Their goals are determined
by the senior management in line with our overall sustainability objectives, and
performance on these two speciﬁc aspects of TCS' sustainability agenda is
reviewed by the Board on an annual basis. A framework to enable the Board's selfevaluation is currently under review.
The Sustainability Council
A sustainability council conducts a quarterly performance review to ensure our
sustainability initiatives are running eﬀectively. The council sees representation
from key departments within TCS.
The Executive Vice President and Global Head of HR presides over all matters
related to sustainability within the organization and the overall corporate
sustainability of the organization falls within the purview of the CEO & MD.

Board Level Committee
(including CEO & MD - Director Responsible for
Corporate Sustainability)

Executive Vice-President & Global Head-HR
Head - Corporate Sustainability

Sustainability Council
Representatives from...
Internal
IT

Infrastructure,
Planning &
Development
Human
Resources

Corporate Social
Responsibility

Corporate
Communications

G4-36

26

Administration

TCS Maitree

Investor
Relations

11 The Code of Conduct for Directors is available at the link:
http://www.tcs.com/investors/corp_governance/Documents/TCS_Directors_Policy.pdf

Health, Safety &
Environment

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Aspect

How
An Audit Committee, consisting of non-executive Directors, oversees TCS'
disclosure process to ensure that suﬃcient and credible information is disclosed,
and that the published ﬁnancial statements reﬂect a true and fair position of the
company's ﬁnances.

Fiscal Oversight

The committee meets four times a year to approve the quarterly accounts and
another three to four times for an in-depth consideration of internal audit reports.
The Audit Committee also actively ensures that the internal audit processes
provide adequate support in improving the company's business processes, i.e.,
making the company more eﬃcient and cost-eﬀective.
As an additional governance control on access to the company's cash, TCS has a
Bank Account Committee of Directors which approves the opening and closing of
bank accounts of the Company and to authorize persons to operate the bank
accounts of the Company.

Independent and
Eﬀective
Validation

TCS has an independent third party, M/s Ernst and Young, to oversee and carry out
internal audits of the company's operations as per an internal audit plan, which is
reviewed annually by the Audit Committee in consultation with the Statutory
Auditors. In line with international practices, the planning and execution of internal
audit is oriented towards the review of controls in the management of risks and
opportunities in the company's activities. Our external auditors are Deloitte
Haskins and Sells, who do not have any undue dependence on TCS.
Benchmarked against global peers, TCS discloses significant operational and
financial metrics on a quarterly basis. The quarterly, half-yearly and annual results
are published in leading Indian newspapers, emailed out to analysts and investors
who subscribe to that service and posted on the website. Half-yearly results are
sent to shareholders along with a message from the Managing Director on the
company's performance.

Disclosure and
Transparency

The quarterly earnings release is accompanied by a press conference, which is
streamed live on our website. We also organize a conference call where the
management briefs investors and analysts on the quarter gone by, and takes
questions.
Through our robust investor outreach program, TCS' management meets investors
at the company's premises or at investor conferences and addresses their queries
and concerns.
The Tata Code of Conduct (TCoC), which every employee signs at the time of
joining the company, contains sections on stakeholder groups that make up a
governing framework for responsible corporate citizenship and principled
behavior. TCS has established procedures to deploy the TCoC and to enable
employees to understand the code and follow it in letter and spirit. The leadership
personally conveys TCS' values and the importance of the TCoC at employee
events. Local ethics counsellors at every company location advise and guide
employees on ethical matters.

Ethics and
Compliance

Customers and suppliers are made aware of the TCoC through specific clauses in
proposals, contracts, contract discussions, and through the TCS website. In
addition, senior managers with access to privileged information, have to comply
with an additional code for the Prevention of Insider Trading. TCS also has a global
policy on Prevention of Sexual Harassment at the work place. This policy was
updated in February 2014 to align with current legal mandates, in particular the
'Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal)
Act, 2013' enacted in India, where TCS has the majority of its workforce.
At the Board level, the Ethics and Compliance Committee oversees TCS' compliance
to the Codes of Conduct to be followed by the directors, officers, and other
employees. Monthly reports are sent to the board level committee on matters
relating to the Insider Trading Code and the TCoC.
Two meetings of the Ethics and Compliance Committee was held during the year.
G4-56, G4-57

27

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Aspect

Board Composition
and Selection of
Board Members

How
The Nomination and Remuneration Committee, consisting of two independent
Directors and two non-independent Directors including the Chairman, makes
recommendations regarding the composition of the Board, identiﬁes suitable
individuals who can be inducted as Independent Directors and takes steps to
refresh the composition of the Board from time to time.
The supervisory capability of the current Board has been signiﬁcantly boosted by
the inclusion of highly capable individuals with global management perspectives,
broad corporate experience and speciﬁc expertise in corporate governance and
compliance as independent, non-executive directors.
The Corporate Governance philosophy at TCS, based on the Tata Code of Conduct,
emphasizes fairness and transparency to all stakeholders. The company also has a
variety of channels through which minority shareholders can interact with the
management or Board to express their concerns.

Protecting Minority
Shareholders'
Interests

We organize regular global investor outreach programs, where investors can
interact with the management. Minority shareholders can move their private
resolutions for discussion by the Board of Directors, or even requisition a General
Body Meeting.
Small shareholders can interact with the Board of Directors in person at the Annual
General Meeting and have their queries or grievances resolved. They can also
communicate any grievance to the Company Secretary's oﬃce where complaints
are tracked to closure. At the Board level, a Shareholders/Investors Grievance
Committee of Directors consisting of two Independent Directors and one
Non-independent Director oversees the redressal of these complaints.
TCS are empowered with a culture that encourages open communications and
oﬀers various channels for communicating concerns and grievances.

Employee Access to
the Board

Larger concerns are presented to the Board by the Executive Directors. In addition,
individual senior-level employees are also invited to present to the Board on
speciﬁc topics under discussion, from time to time.
Lastly, the company has a Whistle Blower Policy, with the necessary mechanism for
employees to directly report concerns about unethical behavior to the
Chairperson of the Audit Committee, without fear of reprisal or victimization.
TCS has an enterprise compliance management (ECM) framework and process
which has been deployed across the company. A digital platform provides an
enterprise-wide view of compliance across global locations. The major risks are
regularly identiﬁed and systematically addressed through mitigating actions.

Sustainability and
Risk Management

Succession
Planning

G4-56, G4-57

28

We ensure compliance to all applicable laws globally, including those relating
to employment and immigration; taxation; forex and export controls; health,
safety, and environment; company laws; establishment; SEZ regulations;
data privacy; anti-bribery and anti-corruption regulations; and IT security.
A committee at the corporate level oversees and monitors the deployment
of the compliance function.
Business sustainability requires consistency in management vision and
minimization of impact when there is a leadership change. Therefore, succession
planning is an important element in ensuring smooth transitions. At TCS, this
occurs at every level – at the corporate level, at the business unit level, at the
account level, and even at the project level.
At the highest level, succession planning of senior management is directly
reviewed by the Executive Committee of the Board. Business or Unit Heads are
invited to Board Meetings from time to time to give update the Board. This
provides an opportunity for the Board to interact with Senior Executives
periodically and assess values, competencies, and capabilities to help them
identify suitable internal successors and provide feedback.

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Aspect

How
The company follows a compensation mix of fixed pay, benefits, and Economic
Value Added Analysis based variable pay. Individual performance pay is
determined by business performance and the performance of the individuals
measured through the annual appraisal process.
Compensation for Non-Executive Directors on the Board consists of:

Remuneration
Policy

Ÿ

Sitting Fees for attending Board meetings and meetings of Committees of the
Board, to the tune of INR 30,000 per meeting.

Ÿ

Commission, as decided by the Board of Directors and approved by members at
the Annual General Meeting, within the ceiling of 1% of the net profits of the
Company as computed under the Companies Act, 1956. The commission is
distributed amongst the Non-Executive Directors based on their attendance and
contribution at the Board and certain Committee meetings, as well as the time
spent on operational matters other than at meetings.

Ÿ

Reimbursement of any out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the Directors for
attending meetings.

Remuneration of the Managing Director and Executive Directors consists of a fixed
component (salary, benefits, perquisites, and allowances) and a performance-liked
variable component (commission).
The Remuneration Committee decides the annual increments within the salary
scale approved by the Members, and the commission payable to the Managing
Director and the Executive Directors out of the profits for the financial year and
within the ceilings prescribed under law.
The commission amount is based on the company's performance as well as that of
the Managing Director and each Executive Director, measured along several
sustainability-linked criteria discussed in this report. Details of the compensation
paid out to Members of the Board in FY 2016 are disclosed on Page 111 of the
Annual Report.

G4-56, G4-57

29

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Serving as an Ethical Exemplar
At TCS, integrity is the first core value that underpins all business activities. The company has earned its
reputation of being trustworthy through several decades of consistent, value-based conduct.
The TCoC serves as a roadmap on principled conduct. Training on the TCoC is a part of the induction process
for all employees. Awareness of the TCoC and adherence to it is promoted by several methods such as an
annual ethics awareness week featuring invited speeches, poster sessions, contests, and ethics themed video
screenings. A Whistle Blower Policy has also been incorporated through which instances of serious
misconduct can be reported directly to the Board without fear of reprisal.
TCS has been able to build a strong, highly successful, global business, and is able to sustain its leadership
position by adhering to the high standards of principled conduct. In all contracts with customers, suppliers,
and partners, clauses on principled conduct are explicitly included. We seek to learn leading practices
through active participation in international and Tata Group forums on ethics, and by adopting leading
practices that aid in improving adherence to principled conduct.
Our policies and training modules have been periodically reviewed and revised to comply with the legislation
with respect to bribery, corruption, and with improved norms on business ethics.
TCS' enterprise risk management program (ERM) involves risk identification, assessment, and
mitigation planning for strategic, operational, and compliance related risks across business units, functions
and geographies.

Our Marketplace
Sustainability of Business Performance
Key stakeholder concerns regarding the sustainability of TCS' business performance are centered around
five major areas:
n

Is there sufficient headroom for continued growth?

n

Is the company's size likely to impede agility?

n

Will supplyside constraints hamper growth or impact margins?

n

Might macroeconomic uncertainties or new technologies impair business?

n

Are we investing sufficiently in innovation?

Some of these concerns are addressed in this section of the report. Key strategic risks faced by TCS and the
company's approach to mitigating them are summarized on Pages 73 and 74 of
the FY 2016 Annual Report.

G4-56, G4-57
13 TCS' Annual Report is available on http://www.tcs.com/investors/Documents/Annual%20Reports/TCS_Annual_Report_2015-2016.PDF

30

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Strategy for Long-term Growth
TCS' revenue growth comes from following a two-pronged strategy built around:
a) Expanding the company's addressable market by region, by industry, and by service-line
b) Deepening the company's relationships with existing clients
Key elements of this strategy for sustainable, longer-term growth are explained in detail on Pages 68 and 69
of the FY 2016 Annual Report.
Demand-side Sustainability

Revenue in USD Mn

Revenue and Cost Trend: FY 2005 - FY 2016
78%

20000

76%
15000

74%

10000

72%
70%

5000

68%
66%

0

Operating Costs as % of Rev

TCS has had a consistently stellar track-record of revenue growth. The company's 10-year Compound Annual
Growth Rate (CAGR) is 18.7%, and we closed FY 2016 with revenue of USD 16.544 billion (up 7.1% YoY). See
Exhibit 10 for details.

FY05 FY06 FY07 FY08 FY09 FY10 FY11 FY12 FY13 FY14 FY15 FY16
Operating Costs as % of Revenue
Rev in USD Mn
Exhibit 10: Revenue and Cost Trend: FY 2005 - FY 2016
Other highlights of FY 2016:
n

Volume growth of 12% YoY

n

Gross margin of 43.9% and EBIT margin of 26.5%

n

Gross headcount addition of 90,182 and net addition of 34,187

TCS believes that our long term growth trajectory is sustainable, because:
n

the global market for IT services is growing

n

offshore outsourcing is a mainstream strategic option today,

n

TCS has the strong foundational elements needed to partake in this growth

n

TCS' strategy for longer-term growth is is to ensure customer satisfaction and deliver results

Global market: Headroom for Growth
According to NASSCOM's Strategic Review, global spend on IT services and BPM is estimated to be $836
billion in 2016. This is a highly fragmented market in which TCS' market share is 1.9%, suggesting significant
headroom for growth.
Going forward, technology spending is expected to further increase as the technology intensity of
businesses increases. The 6-year CAGR for the period 2013-2019 is expected to be 1.7% according to Gartner.
Historically, TCS' growth is far higher than the growth in global spend on IT services.

31

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Enablers for Growth
The pre-requisites for sustaining growth are:
n

Maintaining the same high quality of service that our customers have come to expect

n

Continuing to invest in innovation so as to remain at the cutting edge of technological and
business evolution

n

Ensuring that the company remains agile despite its size

n

Maintaining a strong brand image that encourages customer loyalty

In the next few sub-sections, we explore these four foundational enablers in further detail.
Best-in-class Quality
Our Quality Management System is a complete set of documents, tools, methods, and practices based on our
business model, with a focus on service and solution delivery, customer management, security management,
and people processes. The system is designed to ensure that customers experience a level of certainty that
no other organization can match.
Every project goes through three tiers of quality checks, which are described in Exhibit 11.

Product
Quality

Product
Quality
and Process
Compliance

Internal Quality
Assurance

All work items, products, or deliverables undergo peer
review / independent review / self review / code
walkthrough.

External Quality
Assurance

Internal experts who are not part of the project verify each
work item or deliverable

Final Inspection

An external reviewer does the ﬁnal quality check to ensure
completeness and usability of the package before the ﬁnal
product is delivered to the client. In addition, the external
reviewer periodically veriﬁes that the team is complying
with all quality process.
The Project Leader also does a ﬁnal inspection
before delivery.

Exhibit 11: Three Tiers of Product Quality and Process Compliance Checks
In addition, Project Management Reviews (PMR) are conducted every quarter by senior managers and project
audits are performed by to verify compliance with customer-specific processes and TCS' Integrated Quality
Management System (iQMS).
TCS continues to maintain Level 5 -- the highest maturity level -- enterprise-wide -- for CMMI-DEV®
(Development) version 1.3 and CMMI-SVC® (Services) version 1.3. The company continues to adhere to ISO
certification enterprise-wide for ISO 20000:2011 (Service Management), ISO 27001:2013 (Security
Management), and ISO 22301:2012 (Business Continuity Management) standards.
Information Security and Data Privacy

G4-EN27, G4-DMAPRODUCTS AND SERVICES
32

Information security and data privacy are critical to our business. In pursuit of the Company's Security Vision,
TCS has implemented a comprehensive Information Security Management System (ISMS) framework based
on the globally recognized ISO 27001:2005 ISMS standard, covering network controls, network privacy,
internet security, patch management system, and controls against malicious software. Our team of
information security professionals have industry-recognized credentials such as CISA, CISM, CISSP, CEH, and
CBCP, and possess varied backgrounds and experience, such as application development, infrastructure
services, networking, forensics, legal, and compliance.

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

TCS considers all client information as confidential and have rigorous processes in place to protect the same.
The Company's security policy has been framed to comply with all international privacy laws and information
security laws as applicable. Collection, processing and dissemination of any personal data is done under
highly controlled conditions.
Investing in Innovation
Innovation is one of the strategic pillars of TCS. Our Research and Innovation (R&I) is focused on two primary
themes - digital technologies that help reimagine the relationship between consumers and businesses across
industries, and the continuous industrialization of software and computing. From a sustainability perspective,
R&I has the following responsibilities: to scan emerging technologies and create a pipeline of new offerings;
to create intellectual property and reduce the company's technology risk; and to create thought leadership in
new technologies.
The company has well defined processes and frameworks for converting a new idea from the drawing board
into a scaled and deliverable solution. TCS Co-Innovation Network (COINTM), the ecosystem for collaborative
innovation, has expanded its footprint and marked this with events in Sydney, Australia and Helsinki, Finland.
Innovation and new lines of business: The recently launched neural automation offering IgnioTM, has been the
outcome of research and innovation in TCS Innovation Labs – Pune. The TCS IoT platform, incubated by R&I,
has found wide adoption. We have launched new R&I programs for intelligent and autonomous
infrastructure, personalized medicine, and smart machines. These will provide new offerings and solutions for
customers in the future.
Privacy and security: TCS continues to invest in data privacy and security research. We have created tools
for data masking that can be used in various application development and maintenance scenarios. We have
made progress in research on areas such as cryptography, hash control, and access rights management.
Innovation and customers: We organized the Innovation Forum in New York and London in the last year,
and also hosted Innovation Days with key clients. Our Innovation Champions work with clients to enable
them better leverage innovation. We conducted Design Thinking Workshops to study complete user journeys
and understand B2B2C scenarios and identify the pain points of end users.
Intellectual property: We encourage researchers to file patents. At the end of FY16, the company had
applied for 2,842 patents in total -- including 565 during the past 12 months -- of which the company has
been granted 341 patents.
Encouraging innovation: We have various initiatives to promote innovation within the company. TCS
Innovista, an award program for innovative ideas across the organization, was launched this year. Our
researchers attend and present at top tier research conferences. Best papers are awarded. Scientists are
encouraged to undertake research projects.
Community: Many of our research projects are focused on benefitting the community.
n

Water filters: TCS Innovation Labs- Pune has designed water filters that are affordable and easily usable.
These aim to help low income households protect themselves from waterborne diseases as well as arsenic
and fluoride present in ground water.

n

mKRISHI® is a patented mobile based personalized services delivery platform and we continue to invest in
it and improve its reach and services.

n

Accessibility:
l

Visual Sub-titles: To help the hearing impaired understand videos which do not have sub titles, TCS
Innovation Labs – Mumbai is building a photo-recognition algorithm that can generate 'lip movement;
or 'visual' subtitles.

l

Remote Speech Therapy (RST) platform: This low cost mobile application and web based platform
allows speech therapists to help patients practice and improve articulation.

33

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

n

Mother and child welfare apps: TCS Innovation Labs – Mumbai, along with King Edward Memorial (KEM)
hospital and Mumbai Breastfeeding Promotion Committee (MBPC), developed a mobile based application
to educate lactating mothers. This was launched at KEM hospital in 2015. The lab and KEM hospital have
also developed an app that allows expectant mothers and health workers evaluate the health status of the
mother and child.

n

Social collaboration tool for crowd safety: A multilingual chat platform, GG talk, was developed and
deployed in the Kumbh Mela to help streamline field communication across departments. Secure, realtime communication and the knowledge repository GG Talk offered improved crowd management during
the event.

n

Energy and water: The Remote Energy Monitoring Solution that is creating real energy savings for TCS
has inputs in energy analytics from TCS Innovation Labs - Chennai, and is based on the innovative the TCS
IoT platform. Research on campus water management continues to be an area of interest.

Exhibit 12 presents TCS' investment in R&I.
Expenditure

FY16 ($ Mn)

FY15 ($ Mn)

Expenditure on Research and Innovation

171

147

Exhibit 12: TCS' Expenditure on Research and Innovation in the Last Two Years
Structured for Agility
A key concern that sustained growth engenders is the potential loss of agility in an organization that has
outgrown its structure. Another concern is around whether and how the organization will be able to focus on
the right sectors for future growth.
Both these concerns are addressed by TCS' organization structure (depicted in Exhibit 13), which is designed
to enhance customer focus, accountability and agility. TCS is organized into several operational units aligned
to the different industry verticals. Each market-facing Business Unit owns its resources and pursues growth in
its respective domain at the best possible pace that the domain can support, with all the agility and focus of a
smaller company.

CEO & Managing Director
R&D

Corporate
HR

Major
Markets

Corporate
Finance

Corporate
Affairs

Industry Solutions Units

Organizational infrastructure
Exhibit 13: TCS' Organizational Structure
14 Page 134 of TCS Annual Report FY16

34

Marketing

Legal

New
Growth
Markets

Strategic
Initiatives

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Brand Building
We continue to implement global marketing initiatives to promote the TCS brand. All marketing
communications – including advertising, promotions, and sponsorships – tend to be understated, designed
to strengthen the trust clients repose in us when they choose TCS, along with other key attributes they most
appreciate in our work: high quality, reliability, and dependability. TCS' tagline, 'Experience Certainty'
captures the essence of these attributes.
We evaluate our brand value at regular intervals in select markets. Our brand is benchmarked against a
pre-defined competitive set, and along specific image and personality parameters that include attributes
such as 'ethical' and 'trustworthy'. Our marketing and communications strategy is fine-tuned based on
findings from this brand survey.
TCS participated in leading industry and business events around the world and held key customer summits
world-wide, reaffirming our commitment to delivering a complete brand and organizational experience.
Apart from our regular branding activities, we also continue to invest in building the brand in the digital
space using premium business and technology channels as well through focused branded properties and
sponsorships. These include events and activities in sports such as motor sports, cricket, marathons, and
other distance running events. Lastly, we continue to communicate our brand values using various internal
channels and marketing assets.
Some of TCS' sponsorships in FY 2016 are:
To reinforce TCS' brand attribute of commitment
to fitness and excellence, we sponsor various
marathons across the world.
These sponsorships serve to reinforce TCS'
commitment to wellness, because they give us
an opportunity to engage with runners, their
friends and family, and the broader community
to drive home the importance of fitness and
health. In FY 2016, some of the major marathons
sponsored by TCS were:
TCS New York City Marathon
Boston Marathon
Bank of America Chicago Marathon
TCS Amsterdam Marathon
Standard Chartered Marathon Singapore
Standard Chartered Mumbai Marathon
World 10K Bangalore
TCS IT Wiz, India's biggest inter-school IT Quiz program,
started in 2011 and is also organized in UAE.
The event held in 14 locations across India and has
become a national benchmark in the inter-school
quizzing circuit for the level of research, the intensity
with which teams compete, and the number of
participants' it draws. TCS IT Wiz provides a wider
outlook to students about IT and its trends in the current
global scenario; IT plays an integral role in the
knowledge economy and is a key enabler for success in
diverse fields.
The event provides an opportunity to learn outside the
classroom, fosters a competitive spirit amongst
students, and triggers voluntary learning to prepare
them for the future.

G4-DMA ENVIRONMENTAL,
G4-EN27
35

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Sustainability in Marketing
Being a services company catering to a purely B2B market, sustainability issues such as the environmental,
health and safety impacts of products and software solutions have limited relevance and hence are not
directly applicable.
Likewise, product labeling requirements do not apply to the Company's business. Documentation of the
custom applications the Company builds for clients is as per mutually agreed specifications. System
documentation is not governed by any regulation or industry code. All TCS' marketing communications
including advertising, promotions and sponsorships comply with the relevant laws of the countries that TCS
operates in. No instance of regulatory non-compliance in this area was brought to the Company's attention
in FY 2016.
The related issue of sustainable consumption also does not arise because TCS' clients are sophisticated
consumers – mostly large Global 2000 corporations that consume the Company's services rationally, in
accordance with their business requirements, staying within the vendor concentration limits specified by
their risk oversight policies.
Financial Sustainability
The successful execution of TCS' strategy for sustainable growth requires investments in building capacity, in
people, and in new business initiatives. Our business model has a financial profile characterized by strong
cash generation, low capital needs, low working capital requirements, negligible debt, and very attractive
return on equity.
TCS is a near zero-debt company, and we fund our growth entirely through internal accruals. We did not
receive any significant governmental financial assistance in FY 2016. These structural attributes of our
business model are sustainable. We also have a robust risk management framework with which we scan the
environment for potential risks to this sustainability and take mitigative steps.
Strong Cash Flows
Our growth is financed by cash generated from operations. As of March 31, 2016, total shareholder's equity
stood at $ 11,048.4 Mn (FY15: $ 9,184.9 Mn), of which retained earnings made up $12,499 Mn
(FY15: $10,669 Mn).
As of March 31, 2016, the company had cash and cash equivalents of $4,526.4 Mn (FY15: $3,275.9 Mn), which
includes bank deposits of $70.6 Mn (FY15: $2,697.9 Mn). The net cash generated from operations was
$3,186.5 Mn (FY15: $3,462.3 Mn).
We believe there is sufficient cash from operations to meet our working capital requirements. In addition, we
have short term working capital facilities with various commercial banks.
Delivering Shareholder Value, Year After Year
In FY 2016, we paid a total dividend of $0.7 (INR 43.5) i.e. a payout ratio of 42% of the consolidated profits
under IFRS (excluding special dividend). TCS' market capitalization as of March 31, 2016 is $ 75.25 Bn.

Our Sustainability Services
Information Technology has a big role to play in driving the sustainability agenda for our customers. We
provide consulting services and industry domain expertise to clients on sustainability solutions and
frameworks which helps them optimizing their carbon footprint and enhancing sustainable performance.
According to Smarter 2020 report, the IT sector, through its solutions and services can help achieve the
carbon emission savings of 16.5% of global “business-as-usual” (BAU) emissions in 2020.
Sustainability Services by TCS
TCS continues to play a big role in driving sustainability agenda for its customers. We have a dedicated
strategic Business Unit, Eco-Sustainability Unit who has been providing innovative solutions and industry
36

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

domain expertise. With the global momentum of economic growth over the next few years, we see this
opportunity expanding to a large scale. Most of the opportunities are compliance driven (emissions and
energy related), and geared towards changing customer behavior. TCS has also developed mature solutions
and offerings to tap this opportunity. Our services include Sustainability Performance Management, Energy
Management Services, Water Management, carbon foot-printing, and renewable energy.
Environment, Health, Safety and Sustainability Value Engine: In 2015, TCS launched an Environment Health
Safety and Sustainability value engine, under the Innovation and Transformation Group (ITG), which seeks to
make sustainability domain expertise part of the solutions and services we provide to leading global
manufacturing customers. Each member of ITG, consisting of over 175 business consultants, has an average
of 10+ years of industry experience in functional and technological consulting. As part of this value engine,
we have been providing sustainability advisory and consulting services on compliance management, EHS
consulting, social listening and reporting & disclosure etc.
Sustainability services provided by Eco-sustainability Unit and EHS&S value engine can be split up into
following 4 key areas:
1) Strategy & Risk: To create significant impact, organizations need to consider the environmental
efficiencies in their entire value chain. The internal operations and business processes of an organization
may only contribute a fraction of the ecological impact of the entire value chain, as compared to the other
components of the value chain such as raw materials procurement, their manufacturing and processing,
shipping and transportation, use and disposal. TCS being a strategic consulting partner for many of its
client offers the following solutions to build their sustainability strategic roadmap and risk management at
an enterprise level:
n

Reporting and disclosure: We have developed a Managed Services framework to support
sustainability processes and management procedures, to meet customer's efforts toward voluntary
sustainability disclosures such as the Global Reporting Initiative and the Dow Jones Sustainability Index.
We have been consulting on reporting and disclosure services since past 4 years for manufacturing and
other industries.

n

EHS Managed Services: TCS brings together the scalability aspects of BPS to the Environment, Health &
Safety (EHS) domain. We focus on streamlining and standardizing key EHS areas. These are then
managed as a service model, offering efficiencies & optimization.

n

Compliance management: We support our clients with compliance process blue-printing
as well as creating, verifying and submitting necessary documentation associated with the key
climate change regulations.

n

Supplier Risk Assessments: TCS helps design, deploy, or enhance existing system(s) to monitor
supplier sustainability performance and risks periodically. We also have frameworks to profile and rank
suppliers, and identify different sourcing options

n

Climate change strategy development: As part of climate change strategy development, we help in
developing policies and systems to recognize climate change risk and opportunities and to mitigate the
risks and convert the opportunities to advantage.

2) Operations: TCS continues to invest in building capabilities on the key aspects of the entire value chain to
create significant sustainability impact, and help its clients drive their sustainability agenda effectively and
efficiently by focusing on following areas:
n

EHS consulting and Re-imagination: TCS focuses on aspects like enhancing the safety culture at
organizations via process standardization and best practice consulting. The idea of safety is now
expanded across the dimensions of environment, health, food & assets. The consulting & advisory
services are enabled through enterprise platform solutions, where we support our customers from an
end to end due diligence, system mapping, product selection and implementation.

37

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

n

Energy Management: We help in deploying integrated energy management platform that covers all
type of facilities and energy sources across the enterprise operations. This provides an enterprise-wide
visibility of energy data leading to better decision making while implementing energy efficiency
projects for scope 2 reductions.

n

Renewable energy strategy development: TCS supports organizations to identify feasible options for
renewable energy procurement or installations by analyzing local weather conditions and market
scenario. This also includes suggesting optimal energy mix, considering the relevant policies and
technology maturity of alternative energy resources.

n

Carbon footprinting/baselining: We support customers in carbon footprinting and baselining their
GHG Emissions under Scope 1, 2 and 3 in line with WRI GHG protocol.

n

Water Management: We help conduct water balancing & footprinting exercises at an enterprise level.
This includes outlining product boundary, schematization of production & processes, calculations of
product water footprints and water footprint sustainability sssessment.
We have been developing water and climate change risk maps for our customers for their own
operations and across their supply chain, as well as to develop management plans accordingly.

3) Products & Services: We differentiate ourselves as a trusted partner helping clients drive the sustainability
agenda through the thought leadership in this space, ability to innovate and co-create solutions, rich
sustainability and industry domain expertise and an established partnership ecosystem to provide
following end-to-end solutions:
n

LCA assessment: TCS facilitates sustainability information disclosure for products for voluntary
disclosure requirements such as eco-labels to comply with environmental declarations and
reporting frameworks

4) Consumer Influence: Driven by the cost and scarcity of resources, rapidly changing country and industry
regulations, transformation in the competitive landscape, and increasing investor interest, boardrooms
and chief executives recognize that sustainability is important for the future success of their business. We
help companies to understand the consumer's views through data generated from various channels
through the following:

38

n

Social Media Analytics: Through our social business solutions, engage, listen, analyze and respond to
customers on product sustainability and campaigning

n

Smart Meters/Smart Energy: Our Smart Integration framework merges diverse utility applications like
customer portals, billing system, Meter Data Management System(MDMS), Outage Management System
(OMS), work & asset management systems

Our Workforce

Human capital is the largest factor in our business, and the sustainability of revenue growth is directly
dependent on the organization's ability to attract and retain the right talent. TCS has a highly educated
workforce, whose technical skills are greatly valued globally. Employment is at will with three months' notice
from either side for termination. Less than 0.05% of the workforce is unionized in India, which is our largest
region of operation.
TCS recognizes the criticality of human capital to the business and its sustainability, and has in place mature
processes assessed at the People Capability Maturity Model (PCMM) Level 5.
The total number of employees including subsidiaries as on March 31, 2016 was 353,843 (End-FY15: 319,656).
The workforce is predominantly young, with an average age of 29.5 years. A break-up of the workforce by
employee category and age is given in Exhibits 14 and 15.
Senior, Female
0.5%

Senior, Male
4.1%

Junior, Female
21.6%
Mid-level, Male
31.6%

Junior, Male
30.6%
Mid-level, Female
11.6%
Exhibit 14: Workforce by category

>50, Male -1.4%
>50, Female - 0.3%

40-50, Female -1.1%
40-50, Male - 5.0%
30-40, Female
8.2%

<30, Male
35.4%

30-40, Male
24.5%

<30, Female
24.1%
Exhibit 15: Workforce by age

G4-10, G4-11, G4-DMA
ECONOMIC, G4-DMA SOCIAL,
G4-LA4
39

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Diversifying the talent pool
TCS is an Equal Opportunity Employer and subscribes to the Tata Code of Conduct in embracing diversity in
race, nationality, religion, ancestry, marital status, gender, age, ethnic origin, physical ability, and sexual
orientation. Compensation levels are merit-based, determined by quali cation, experience levels,
special-skills if any, and performance. Gender and any of the other diversity parameters do not play
a part in determining compensation levels. TCS has a well-de ned Diversity and Inclusion Policy.
With tailored training programs and greater gender as well as cross-cultural sensitization, TCS has been able
to diversify hiring, in terms of gender, geographic locations, and academic discipline.
With over 100,000 women employees, TCS is one of the largest employers of women in the world. As on
March 31, 2016, women constituted 33.8 % (consolidated) of TCS' workforce. This success is due to several
initiatives that weave diversity and inclusion into the ethos of the organization (see Exhibit 16).

SENIOR
iExcel
Focused Talent Mobility

JUNIOR

Ÿ Sponsorship to leadership roles
Ÿ Access to external networking forums

Key D&I
initiatives
at TCS

Panel Discussion,
Network to win
(nWin)
D&I Star Awards,
Be Inspired

MIDDLE
Managing
Diverse
Teams(MDT)
Women
Discussion
Circles

Ÿ Transparent & collaborative mentoring platforms
Ÿ Re-integrations
Ÿ Workplace policies & bene ts
Ÿ Day care tie-ups & senior advisor connect
Ÿ Social media networking platform

Exhibit 16: Diversity Initiatives
Through the initiative 'Network to Win' mentors are assigned to small groups of junior women employees
to provide guidance on professional and personal aspects. Career aspirations, work-life integration,
organizational culture, life stage changes, leadership development, and safety and wellbeing, are
addressed through discussion circles, formal and informal networking, coﬀee chats, virtual live chats,
and panel discussions.
'iExcel' is a special program which grooms high potential women in middle and senior levels to become
leaders. Covering aspects like Business Finance, Customer Partnership and Sales, Business Strategy, Executive
Presence and Power Messaging, the program allows participants to interact with top leaders within and
outside TCS, who also act as role models and mentors. TCS has also developed a special learning module for
mid-level managers, both men and women, to equip them with the skills required to motivate and eﬀectively
work with a diverse team. This module — called Managing Diverse Teams (MDT) — was launched on the
company's internal development portal.
At the end of FY16, TCS had a diverse base of 3,53,843 employees in 55 countries from 129 nationalities
including 33.8 per cent women professionals. Exhibit 17 has the non- Indian workforce breakup by nationality.

G4-10, G4-DMA SOCIAL,
G4-LA1
40

14 Page 134 of TCS Annual Report FY16

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Others
29.5%

Mexican
12.8%

British
10.6%
Chilea

n 3.5%

American
13.9%

Filipino
11.4%
Chinese
Ecuadorian
5.7%
6.7%
Columbian
Uruguayan
3.1%
2.8%
Exhibit 17: Non-Indian Workforce by nationality

Talent Acquisition
TCS continues to attract high quality talent and has been able to successfully scale up the talent acquisition
process by developing a global workforce plan that is aligned with the company's short, medium, and longterm business plans. The company's talent requirements are ful lled partly by re-skilling and up-skilling
employees not already allocated to speci c projects, and partly through focused recruitment drives
conducted by the Talent Acquisition Group. Experienced professionals are recruited through online job sites,
head-hunters, and recruitment agencies, as well as through employee referral schemes.
The company's talent acquisition strategy is focused on campus recruitment within India and internationally,
as also lateral hiring. The company has invested in building relationships with universities across the world,
as well as improving the quality of academic training at these engineering colleges. In FY 16, TCS (including
subsidiaries) recruited 90,182 employees, on a gross basis (as compared with 67,123 in FY 2015). Of this,
34,365 (38%) were graduates fresh out of college.

Indians
82.7%

Others
17.3%

Exhibit 18: New employees in India and other countries
G4-10, G4-DMA SOCIAL,
G4-LA1
41

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Breakup of new employee hires by gender and age

30-40,
Female,
3.7%

<30, Female, 32.5%

Other, 18.3%
30-40, Male,
10.9%

<30, Male, 49.2%

<30, Male

<30, Female

30-40, Male

30-40, Female

40-50, Male

40-50, Female

>50, Male

>50, Female

40-50, Male,
2.0%
40-50,
Female, 0.5%
>50, Male, 1.0%
>50, Female,
0.2%

Exhibit 19: New employees categorized by gender and age
Academic institutes are important stakeholders in our talent acquisition strategy. Our Academic Interface
Program (AIP) helps us build strong, long-term relationships with academic institutions. This year, faculty and
students from over 900 institutes globally benefitted through a range of initiatives including technology
awareness, contests, and development of industry oriented curricula.

Faculty Development
Programs: TCS’ senior
employees conduct
training programs for
faculty, to keep them
abreast of technology
developments and
industry perspectives.

Student Workshops: We
conduct sessions for
students on technical,
managerial, and soft-skills
topics to enhance
competitiveness and
workplace-readiness.

TCS is working with the
Government of India and
state governments to
establish ﬁve IIITs, under
a public-private
partnership model

TCS' research
scholarship program
has supported 228
research scholars from
33 institutes across
India in FY 16

Exhibit 20: TCS' Academic Interface Program
Campus Commune
TCS has created a student engagement platform, Campus Commune, for Engineering, MBA, and Science
graduates. Campus Commune aims to create an environment of collaborative learning for these students and
gives them an opportunity to learn more about the company, as well as its various business units, and
network with other students. More than 800,000 students from over 1,000 institutions participate actively on
Campus Commune.

G4-DMA SOCIAL

42

Through the platform, TCS also mentors students, inspiring them to explore unique career opportunities
within the company. Students share experiences as well as knowledge of industry trends, engage in
discussions, and participate in debates and polls. We currently have 32 interactive channels on this portal,

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

which focus on business units interests, and gamified hiring. About 10% of the specialized campus
recruitment for niche skills takes place through such contests.
Three new channels – Digital Trends, ESRM & ECM and Gamelab were started in FY16 with an objective of
bringing awareness and creating positive mindshare about business units and career opportunities. The ITIS
business unit in TCS used a gamified learning channel to identify and interview students for campus hiring
this year.
Kaizen Express is a social learning platform designed for students to test and improve their English language
skills. The platform incorporates gamification learning techniques to make it engaging and lively. A 'study
meter' is automatically calibrated based on the user's performances at each level. At every stage of the
learning journey, the students are guided by language experts from TCS, who offer timely guidance on the
portal – through blogs, video blogs, podcasts, or questions related to grammar.
This year, TCS made +760 job offers through contests such as CodeVita, TESTimony, Enginx, GameOn!, and
CASE Wiz.

CodeVita provides a
platform for coding
enthusiasts in technical
colleges to showcase
their programming
skills. Code Vita, the
world's largest coding
contest, has also been an
opportunity for TCS to spot the
brightest programming talent
and encourage them to work on
exciting projects with TCS.
CodeVita drew 197,000
registrations across 18 countries.

Enginx is the Engineering
Innovation contest from TCS'
Engineering and Industrial Services
Business Unit. The contest
challenges participants to create
innovative engineering solutions
towards addressing the needs of the
developing world, through applying
Frugal Engineering, Value
Engineering, Reverse
Innovation
principles to
produce at the
most
affordable
price point.

TESTimony is India's biggest
software testing contest for
engineering students. 127,000
students from 10 cities and 900+
engineering colleges in India have
taken the challenge. Students
learn about mobile testing,
agile assurance, DevOps,
using tools like Appium,
Selenium and Jmeter

TCS GameOn! is a
Game Design, and
Development Contest for
students with a unique
combination of exponential
creative skills and immense
passion for games. This is an
annual National level challenge launched by DESS SMWR Gamification sub-practice for Engineering, Arts
and Science colleges across India.

Casewiz is TCS' flagship Case Study contest
sponsored by Manufacturing ITG Unit to engage
with students. The contest is open to students
from India's top business schools.

Exhibit 21: TCS' Campus Commune provides a platform for students to learn
43

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Local Recruitment outside India
TCS is a multinational company with operations in 55 countries. Local recruitment is an integral part of our
staffing strategy in each of these countries, spanning every level in the local organization. In FY 2016, TCS
recruited 16,173 employees outside India. At the TCS group level, the percentage of senior-level employees
among local recruits was 8% (compared with 5% for FY15).
We have built relationships with universities through our Academic Interface Programs in different parts of
the world. The brand awareness created by these programs helps attract quality talent when we participate
in their placement programs and conduct on-campus interviews. Recruitment of experienced professionals is
done through our empanelled recruitment agencies and head-hunters.
Local Subcontractors
A key element of our recruitment strategy is the need-based use of contractors, especially for assignments
which are of a short-term nature or which require skills not available readily, or in sufficient numbers,
internally. For this purpose, TCS maintains strong relationships with a network of empanelled vendors –
staffing agencies and head-hunters – in every country that we operate in. In case such skills are needed on a
longer term basis, we try to build the capabilities internally and eventually replace these contractors with
employees. In FY 2016, TCS spent $1,280 million (7.7% of revenue) on subcontractors, compared with $1,084
million (7% of revenue) in FY15.
Talent Development
iEvolve is a comprehensive next-generation competency and learning management system developed by
TCS in-house. The platform provides an integrated mechanism for employees to record their Skills &
Competencies (Behavioral, Leadership, Technical & Domain) and on-going training requirements that
translate into developing & administering individual learning plans; document, track & report learning
delivery; and assess competencies.
This dynamic, user-friendly, mobile accessible platform facilitates every employee's learning journey. It
enables employees to aspire to newer roles and provides mechanisms (learning objects) to meet those
aspirations. It thereby reinforces TCS' commitment to the continuous development of each of its employees.
At the start of the year, employees -- in consultation with their supervisor -- define a learning and
development plan for the year, based on their interests and aspirations as well as the needs of the project
and business unit they work in. Employees then undertake the various training sessions and workshops
outlined in the plan. These may include e-learning sessions on iEvolve, external certifications, iQlass (digital
interactive classrooms) connect sessions, classroom sessions conducted by various technical Centers of
Excellence within TCS, as well as Management Development Programs (MDPs). Each employee is assessed
biannually on the progress made against this plan.
Average per capita training hours in FY 2016
Category

Male

Female

Senior level

24.3

32.8

Middle level

40.2

43.4

Junior level

104.2

84.0

Exhibit 22: Average training hours invested by employees in FY 2016
G4-DMA SOCIAL, G4-LA9

44

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

In FY 2016, a total of 4,288,617 learning days were invested towards competency development, including
training in relevant technology areas. The breakup of this is as below: See Exhibits 21 and 22 for details. Of
this, 148,620 learning days went into developing management skills and leadership qualities among
employees identified for managerial and leadership roles.
2%

25%

Junior

73%

Middle
Senior

Exhibit 23: Learning days by employee category
Training programs at the entry level, as well as continuous learning programs that cover technology, domain,
and project management practices, have been enhanced during the year to ensure that TCS develops the
right competencies in its workforce to meet customers' business needs. This process also helps individuals
drive career growth and realize their potential in different ways. In addition, HR also organizes multiple
programs on financial management, health, and other areas that assist them in managing career endings.
Talent Retention
TCS views talent retention as another critical success factor – as important as talent acquisition – and has
invested heavily in building an employee-friendly culture and developing mature processes towards
improving it. We have been assessed enterprise-wide at PCMM Level 5, and our retention programs are
considered best-in-class in the industry. Employee retention has been enhanced by offering competency
enhancement and career growth options, role mobility, challenging assignments, competitive and
differential compensation, flexible working hours, a collaborative work environment, as well as rewards,
recognition and benefits.
The outcomes of these retention programs have also been superlative. The 'return to work' and retention
rates after parental leave are 74%. Although the majority of parental leave was taken by female employees, 6
of the 14 employees who opted for adoption leave were men. In FY 2016, attrition in IT Services was 14.7%
(on a LTM basis) while overall attrition, including BPS, stood at 15.5%. Of this, attrition caused by departures
of new hires within the same year was 4.5%. Of total attrition, female employee attrition was 34 %. The
attrition rate is higher at junior levels – 16.4%. Exhibits 23, 24, and 25 have more details.

2%
4%

29%

Female
34%

<30yrs
30-40 yrs
40-50 yrs

65%
Exhibit 24A: Departures by Age
(out of employee base in age group)

Male
66%

>50yrs

Exhibit 24B: Departures by Gender
(of Total Attrition)

G4-DMA SOCIAL,
G4-LA1, G4-LA3
45

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

35%

30%

30%

28%
24%

25%

22%

19%

20%
14%

15%
10%
5%
0%

Geowise Attrition%
India

Europe

Asia Pacific

UK & Ireland

Emerging Markets

NA & Canada

Exhibit 25: Departures by Region
Career Development
All employees receive regular performance and career development reviews. Our CareerHub platform helps
employees learn and grow, providing timely updates to fuel their career in the organization. An integral part
of the CareerHub is Inspire - TCS High Potential Program and CareerHub process. The 'Inspire' program aims
at identification, engagement and building of a robust leadership pipeline, in line with the organizational
growth objectives. Special initiatives are taken to make high potential employees more visible and offer
projects and learning that will enhance their skills. They also undergo focused leadership programs to help
them move into higher roles. CareerHub is used by all other employees in middle to senior management. It is
a competency based approach with emphasis on experiential learning. In both these processes, employees
have career discussions with their chosen mentors, who create customized Individual Development
Plans for them.
At TCS, career processes are online and transparent, with a holistic view of aspirations, mentoring, and
developmental interventions, as well as an opportunity to share their feedback online. “My Career Eureka” is a
social media platform for employees to share insights and get advice on their careers in TCS from peers and
experts. Employees can also voice their views on career processes on this community. Employees receive fast
responses to their queries, read inspirational success stories, and receive guidance from senior executives
who act as mentors. The community is also used to crowdsource ideas on improving our career
planning tools.
Competitive Compensation Model
TCS has to attract and retain talent in a highly competitive market. Most of our workforce consists of software
engineers who hold engineering graduate and post-graduate degrees. Exhibit 26 depicts our employee costs
over the last three years.
Year

FY 2014

FY 2015

FY 2016

Employee Costs in USD Mn

7,544

8,940

9,709.9

Exhibit 26: Employee Costs over the Last Three Years
To ensure competitiveness in the pursuit of talent, we regularly benchmark our compensation plans and
benefits with those offered by peers to ensure that competitiveness. There is also a skill-based allowance for
employees possessing niche skills, designed to motivate employees to acquire marketable skills, thereby
benefiting themselves as well as the company.

G4-EC1, G4-EC5,
G4-DMA SOCIAL, G4-LA2,
G4-LA11, G4-LA13
46

15 Excluding impact of $423 million paid as Special One-time Bonus to employees
16 TCS offers gratuity, a defined benefit retirement plan, to eligible employees in India and in certain overseas locations. The plan provides
for a lump sum payment to vested employees at retirement, death while in employment, or on termination of employment. Total benefit
obligation at the end of FY2016 stood at $369.4 million.

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Compensation structures are driven by prevailing practices in each country we operate in. But across the
enterprise, remuneration is the same for men and women working at the same location and in the same
grade. In India, in addition to a fixed component of the salary, there is a variable component linked to the
Economic Value Added (EVA). Payout of that component depends on organizational performance as well as
individual performance. This alignment of our company's and employee's interests has the effect of
strengthening team spirit and improving collaboration among teams.
Reward and Recognition
Subscribing to a performance based culture, we have several schemes for recognizing and rewarding
employees. TCS Gems is the global online employee recognition platform for managing reward mechanisms.
Some of the popular awards are Star of the Month and Quarter Awards, On the Spot Award, Best Program and
Project Manager Awards, Star Team Award, Beyond Performance Award, Service Awards. Employees may also
get appreciation certificates. Employees who get rewards can choose from a variety of redemption options.
Other forms of rewarding outstanding performance include fast-track promotions, sponsorship of external
training and certification programs, assignment to key positions, membership of professional bodies,
sponsorship to international conferences, public announcements of individual or team achievements on the
intranet, internal magazines, town hall meetings, and so on.
Challenging Assignments
The importance of work content and an individual's quest for self-actualization can never be overstated. By
virtue of its broad footprint across regions and industries, and the execution of large complex projects, we
offer plenty of opportunities for ambitious individuals who seek challenging assignments and exposure to
different kinds of roles, technologies, and locations. This contributed to our ability to retain high performers.
Employee Engagement and Motivation
Our internal social networking portal, “Knome”, facilitates multi-dimensional engagement with the largely
young workforce. Employees across the globe post their views, suggestions, and questions, and get feedback
through comments and answers from other employees. The senior leadership engage regularly with
employees through blogs and live chat sessions, which allows each employee to make their voice heard, and
their feedback taken into account by the top management.
Employee retention and motivation are greatly facilitated by fostering a spirit of community, through shared
activities outside of work. TCS Maitree provides a platform for engaging employees and their families, and
develop a sense of camaraderie. It also channels their energy and enthusiasm into activities that benefit local
communities and the environment. Maitree provides employees with avenues for various interest-based
clubs, such as for music, dance, adventure, ecology, yoga, sports, and photography. Activities such as Family
Day, Summer Camps for employees' children, Celebrating Cultural Diversity are also organized.
We take an active interest in the wellbeing of employees and have sponsored and supported athletic and
sporting events at the national, regional, and local levels. The company encourages employees to participate
in these activities and stay fit. On our campuses, the focus on a culture of fitness translates into a myriad of
activities, from yoga to aerobics, from tennis and badminton coaching to cricket and football tournaments.
Initiatives like TCS Fit4Life and Purpose4Life have enthused employees to take care of their fitness and to
volunteer towards social causes. The company encourages employees to participate in these initiatives by
forming teams, and through 'gamification'.

G4-DMA SOCIAL,
G4-LA2, G4-LA13
17 Remuneration for men and women at the same location and grade is in the ratio 1:1

47

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Through Fit4Life, TCS' CEO himself encourages employees to form teams and pursue a passion for running.
Our sponsorship of the Mumbai Marathon, the World 10K Bangalore, and other long-distance events across
the world has sparked widespread interest in fitness and running.
Occupational Health and Safety
Health and safety (H&S) considerations are integral to our business process and are laid down in the
organization's Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) Policy which translates into the objectives and targets
towards inculcating safe behavior (see Exhibit 27).
Objectives

Goals

Building a safety culture and
inculcating safe work
practices among employees
and contractors

Training associates and
contractors

Target
1 hour per associate per year
2 hours per contract staﬀ per year
1 communication per month

Creating general awareness
1 campaign per quarter
Providing safe workplaces
and compliance to H&S
management system and
regulatory requirements
Incident reporting and
implementation of remedial
measures

H&S inspections for all the sites

1 annual inspection per site

Compliance to H&S legal and
HSE-MS requirements

100%

Reporting of accidents and near
miss incidents

Increase in number of reporting

Resolution of incidents reported
and eﬀectiveness of measures

100%

Exhibit 27: Occupational Health and Safety Objectives and Targets
Globally, we strive to achieve beyond compliance leadership in occupational health and safety. 115 TCS
centers are Occupational Health and Safety Management System -certified as per OHSAS 18001:2007.
The Occupational Health and Safety Management System is also integrated with the organization's Quality
Management System. Under the management system, each location has a Health, Safety and Environment
committee that meets on a regular basis to discuss H&S issues and improvement programs. The Board-level
Health, Safety, and Sustainability committee and Corporate Sustainability Council review our health and
safety performance on a regular basis.
Hazard identification and risk assessment method is followed to identify workplace risks to employees as well
as contractors and ensure sufficient and suitable mitigation measures are in place for a healthy and safe work
environment. The generic OHS risks identified include ergonomic risks, road safety in company provided
transport, indoor air quality, fire and other general office risks like slips, trips, falls, electrical shock,, etc.
We proactively monitor safety measures and performance at upcoming facilities across India. Deployment of
safety processes and systems are mandated with effective tracking of lead as well as lag safety indicators in
order to maintain a comprehensive oversight of safety performance.

G4-DMA SOCIAL, G4-LA5,
G4-LA8

Employee engagement is the key pillar of safety initiatives at TCS. This is achieved through various
communication channels like trainings, posters, events, emails, floor meetings, skits, videos, and blog posts
on Knome (an internal social media portal). Safety training is a mandatory part of induction for new
employees, while continuous learning programs increase occupational health and safety awareness among
employees. In FY 2016, we spent over 670,000 hours imparting training on health, safety, and environment
through classroom sessions, inductions, and web based training. Several campaigns like the Road Safety
Awareness, Ergonomics Awareness, Fire Safety awareness, Incident reporting engage associates to make
them more aware and safety conscious.
18 Remuneration for men and women at the same location and grade is in the ratio 1:1

48

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Our SafetyFirst initiative was launched in May 2014 with the objective to become a zero fatality organization
across four key areas – health failures, accidents, external violence and self-harm. Over the last 2 years, the
initiative has catalyzed a change in the mindset and behavior of employees. The transition has been from
understanding that 'safety begins with me', gradually towards adopting 'safety as a habit'.

Ergonomics
Awareness
Campaign (October 2015)

Fitness Session - Kochi

Floor Walk - Bhubaneswar

Training Session for
Contractors - Hyderabad

Due to our sedentary lifestyles, ergonomics continues to be a
prominent concern. TCS has a 360 degree approach to ergonomics –
starting from providing an ergonomically correct workstations and
chairs, awareness campaigns on the correct sitting posture and

Fitness Session - Trivandrum

workstation stretches. The Ergonomics Campaign is organized every
year, and in 2016 over 100,000 employees participated through
various activities. Local teams continue to monitor eﬀectiveness,
engage with management, and drive improvement in this area
Training Session for
Contractors - Kolkata

Video Screening - Pune

Skit Performance - Delhi

Doctor Session - Lucknow

Eye Check Camp - Delhi

Sustain a Stronger Mind Initiative at TCS UK Offices
TCS UK undertook a wellbeing campaign
initiative ‘Sustain a Stronger Mind’ across
offices that ran over a 12-week period.
The objective of this campaign was to
reduce workplace stress and promote
positive mental well being by engaging
our employees through activities that
focussed on:
n

Physical wellbeing in relation to stress
by doing workstation stretches and
fitness sessions

n

Mental wellbeing in relation to stress
by promoting seven positive points
for a better life

n

Nutrition in relation to stress by
organizing nutritional breakfast
workshops to highlight the benefits of
a balanced diet

The ‘Five Steps to Wellbeing’ that promote positive mental wellbeing were used to structure the
campaign. They were: connect, take notice, be active, keep learning and give.
Road Safety Campaign

G4-LA8

49

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Taking the Road Safety Campaign
Beyond TCS…
We organize a Road Safety Campaign every year to
engage employees, business partners, and the
society at large. Safety being a focus area in the
TATA Group policy, the campaign has been
extended beyond TCS since 2012. This initiative was
started as a pilot in TCS-Kerala. After receiving
excellent feedback, it has now been implemented
at various branches in India.
During the ﬁfth Road Safety Campaign held in
January 2016, we reached out to educational
institutions to sensitize them about road safety. In
Mumbai, an inter-college skit content was
organized on the same theme. Six local colleges
participated and were given an opportunity to
perform within TCS premises.

Injury Statistics
TCS being a service sector company, most in-office injuries occur due to slips, trips, and falls or being struck
by stationary objects, etc. Road accidents in company provided transport is also a key focus area. We focus on
capturing information on all types of incidents including accidents, near-misses, and safety observations and
ensure 100% closure of the reported incidents with effective corrective and preventive actions.
Severity

Number of Injuries

Fatality

0

Lost Time Injury

35

Medical Treatment Injury

30

First-aid Injury

69

Exhibit 28: Work-related Injuries Based on Severity

G4-LA6, G4-LA8

50

19 There was one fatality near TCS' Nagpur oﬃce to a third party person standing outside the mechanical gate and was fatally injured due to
the movement of the gate.

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Break-up by person type

Genderwise break-up
30

30

20

15

20

24

20

10

11

10

0

0
MALE

FEMALE

EMPLOYEES

CONTRACT STAFF

Break-up by accident type
30

20

20

7

10
0

Road
accidents

Slips, Trips
Falls

2
Caught or
Struck by
object

6
Others

Exhibit 29: Break up of High Severity Injuries
0.100

0.0931

0.090

0.08

0.080
0.070
0.060

0.0512

0.050
0.040

0.047

0.0419

0.035

0.030
0.020
0.010
0
2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

2015-16

Exhibit 30: Lost Time Injury Frequency Rate (Year-on-Year Trend)
Lost Time Injury Frequency Rate (LTIFR) is the number of lost time injuries per million man-hours worked
(TCS employees and contract staff working in TCS offices).

20 High severity injuries include fatalities and lost time injuries
21 Only work related injuries have been considered from all geographies. This does not include the lost time cases on road in personal or
public transport involving employees travelling to and from work. These cases are tracked internally and reviewed and road safety
awareness campaigns are aligned to sensitize employees on road safety.

51

Our Community
Being part of the Tata group, TCS has a unique relationship with society at large. This section highlights our
global CSR initiatives – through volunteering, sponsorships, and pro bono IT services – in the areas of
education and skill building, health and wellness, and environmental sustainability.
Tata Sons Ltd, the holding company of the Tata group, owns close to 75% of TCS. Around two-thirds of the
equity of Tata Sons Ltd is held by various philanthropic trusts – the largest being the Sir Dorabji Tata Trust and
Sir Ratan Tata Trust – which have created and nurtured leading national institutions for science and
technology, medical research, social studies, and performing arts.
These trusts also provide aid and assistance to various non-government organizations working in the areas of
education, healthcare, and livelihoods.
Direct and Indirect Economic Impact
The most significant, direct economic impact TCS has is the productivity benefits that clients gain from the
automation of various business processes. Greater cost-efficiency and productivity at a firm-level translates
into higher productivity for the larger economy.
Our work directly translate into community benefits when we engage with various governments to digitize
their operations, particularly in the area of citizenry services. For instance, MeeSeva is an e-governance
initiative in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana that incorporates the vision of the National eGovernance Plan –
facilitating a single entry portal for a range of G2C services. TCS does not believe that any part of its
operations has a potential or actual negative impact on the communities in which we work.
Our profitable global operations result in payment of corporate taxes applicable in multiple countries. The tax
expense relating to overseas operations is determined in accordance with tax laws applicable in countries
where such operations are domiciled and provided for. In FY 2016, TCS provided for a total tax expense of
$1,142.4 Mn. Based on NASSCOM's figures for the entire sector, it is estimated that we contributed 1% to
India's GDP and our share of India's exports in FY 2016 is over 6%.
Direct and Indirect Employment
TCS' strategy of tapping into the local talent in each delivery location results in the generation both direct
and indirect employment. Direct employment results in the creation of tens of thousands of white-collar
jobs, broadening tax collections at the local, state, and central levels.
Each delivery center has over a thousand employees. The construction of these massive campuses employs
architects, engineers, and construction workers. Once the facility is commissioned, the center opens up local
employment opportunities for skilled workers, while our vendors hire housekeeping staff, security guards,
drivers, gardeners, maintenance workers, chefs, cafeteria staff, etc.
It is conservatively estimated that TCS generates 27 indirect jobs for every 10 direct jobs. Taking these indirect
jobs into account, TCS' consolidated, global employment generation footprint is estimated at over 956,000.
Broad based Regional Development
Historically, the emergence of the Indian IT industry occurred in the four large metropolitan cities of New
Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, and Kolkata. Further expansion to Bangalore and Hyderabad occurred with a view
to take advantage of the available engineering talent and supporting infrastructure.
Recognizing the multiplier effect that the IT-BPS industry has on local economies, various state governments
are encouraging IT companies to establish centers in smaller cities. This is to broad-base the resultant
economic development beyond just the Tier 1 cities. With a view to leverage benefits of low costs and a
motivated local workforce, the IT-BPS industry has started establishing centers in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities. Over
the last four years, TCS has been leading this foray with the workforce in Tier 2 and 3 cities steadily growing as
a percentage of the company's total workforce in India.

G4-DMA SOCIAL, G4-SO1
G4-SO1
52

22 More details of the work funded by these trusts can be found on their websites (http://www.dorabjitatatrust.org and www.srtt.org).

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Intangible benefits
TCS employees are well educated, well-groomed young professionals. Almost a third of our workforce
comprises of women. The experience of working within a global company allows employees to broaden their
horizons. In Tier-2 cities in India, this influences parents to invest in higher education for their children,
including girls, who find inspiration to seek higher education and pursue corporate careers.
Corporate Social Responsibility: Nurturing People and Planet
Our CSR board-level committee recommends to the Company's board the CSR policy as well as the
expenditure, monitoring the CSR policy from time to time, overseeing the activities impacting the quality of
life of various stakeholders; overseeing the company's corporate and societal obligations; and reports to the
Board about the same. The TCS Foundation was established in March 2015 with the objective of undertaking
CSR activities of the Company.
Our CSR initiatives seek to leverage our global presence and large employee base to transform the delivery of
social programs while using IT expertise to create agility and efficiency. We undertake community initiatives
with a focus on education skill development, health & wellness, and environmental sustainability.
Initiatives are also tracked to determine the outcomes achieved and the benefits to the community. Internal
tracking mechanisms and follow-up field visits are regularly carried out. The Company has engaged highly
trained employees to drive and monitor these activities.

Addressing the Global Skill Gap
The company's focus on skill development has been enhanced with larger reach and significant
impact in FY 2015-16.
Since 2010, BPS Employability Program has provided an effective platform for the development of
communication skills, corporate etiquette, interview skills, and basic computer knowledge among
youth in marginalized regions of the country. The program involves 80 to 100 hours of interactive
training designed to enhance employability. Till date, the program has trained more than 50,000
youth across 17 states in India.
Inspired by the
success of the BPS
Employability
Program, we also
created and
implemented a
specially designed
initiative to enhance
employability among
engineering students
from rural areas. The
IT Employability
Program includes
200 hours of
Students participating in the IT employability program in Karnataka, India
learning, which starts
during the fifth
semester and continues, in a phased manner, till the seventh semester of the undergraduate or
engineering course. After the training, students attend a TCS placement drive through which the
meritorious candidates find employment. A key highlight of the program is the involvement of TCS
employees and this engagement has helped students envision a future career in IT. In FY 16, over 500
students benefitted from this program.
G4-SO1

53

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

This year too, TCS contributed INR 350,000 towards 5 scholarships through Foundation for Academic
Excellence and Access (FAEA) to help SC/ST students studying in professional courses in leading
colleges in the country.
TCS' commitment towards the development of faculty for academic institutes, improvement of
employability of students and development of curricula as per industry requirements has been
consistent through its Academic Interface Programme (AIP). TCS helps 75 boards of various
institutes across the country in revamping their curriculum as per current industry trends. In addition,
TCS has signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the governments of Gujarat, Assam, Tamil
Nadu, Maharashtra, and Jharkhand to serve as a partner in the establishment of Indian Institute of
Information Technology in Vadodara, Guwahati, Tiruchirappalli, Nagpur, and Ranchi respectively.
This is being done through the PPP model in association with the Govt. of India and other industry
partners.
TCS announced a five year extension to its Research Scholar Program (RSP), which seeks to support
doctoral students in India in computing sciences. Under this program, scholars receive a stipend as
well as funds to travel to conferences to present their work. Scholars have an opportunity to interact
with TCS researchers and receive mentoring. This flagship program supports nearly 20% of all the
computer science PhD students in India as per an ACM survey. In FY16, TCS selected 40 research
scholars, taking the total scholars supported by the program to 228. An extension to the program
is expected to benefit an additional 200 students from 61 institutes across the country, in a five
year period.
The TCS RSP complements other efforts the company is making in enhancing the research and
computing capabilities in India. TCS is the founding sponsor of the ACM India Doctoral Dissertation
Award. The company is also making significant financial commitments in setting up new institutes of
information technology across the country.
The FC Kohli Center on Intelligent Systems (KCIS) at IIIT Hyderabad established by TCS, aims to
coordinate and energize education and research and help in imparting high-quality training to
bachelors, masters, and doctoral students. The research undertaken at the center is expected to have
the potential for significant social impact through innovative products, and start-ups.

Created and first implemented in 2000, TCS'
Adult Literacy Program (ALP) is accessible
in nine Indian languages and three foreign
languages. These IT enabled modules for
functional literacy have reached 261,518
beneficiaries globally.

Empowering adults through literacy

G4-SO1

54

Through our Advanced Computer Training for Visually Impaired (ACTC), we have been working
on creating employment among individuals with visual impairment. This program also covers
personality development in line with business requirements of the industry. This extraordinary
project aims at bridging the gap between computer skills of people who are visually impaired and
those required by IT/ITES. Till date, TCS has trained 176 individuals of which 127 candidates have
found eGmployment.

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Participants in the
all women training batch, UDAAN

UDAAN, the Special Industry Initiative (SII) for J&K is funded
by the Ministry of Home Affairs and implemented by
National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC). TCS was
one of the first organizations to partner with NSDC to
implement the program in Kolkata. UDAAN is a part of an
overall initiative for addressing economic issues in J&K, with
this program specifically focusing on providing skills and job
opportunities to graduate and post graduate youth. Since
inception, the program has trained 697 youths, of which 559
have received employment offers. 370 of the trainees have
joined TCS.

TCS is expanding its focus to include digital literacy and
entrepreneurship in remote locations across India.
Bridge IT is a unique project that provides digital
literacy in schools, adult literacy through a computer
based functional literacy program, and creates
entrepreneurs armed with digital tools to enhance their
business opportunities. The program currently reaches
4,817 children, 505 adults and 31 entrepreneurs in 36
villages across three states. TCS has also invested in a
new center at IIIT Hyderabad to energize education and
research and help impart high-quality training to
bachelors, masters, and doctoral students.

School students participating
in InsighT

Benefitting economically disadvantaged
communities of rural India through IT

InsighT is an IT awareness and empowerment initiative for
senior school students in India. It is based on the syllabi
prescribed by school boards. By using the Case Study
Methodology, students are able to understand, retain and
apply programming concepts in their examinations, where
they see significantly higher scores. It delivers a unique
blend of technical and life skills to improve students'
IT proficiency. InsighT has been made available on the
cloud since February 2016, to enable greater accessibility
to the program.

Using the quiz platform is as an effective supplement to computer science. TCS IT Wiz, the biggest
inter-school IT Quiz program in India and Rural IT Quiz, Government of Karnataka's flagship program,
aim to build awareness and improve IT skills of young students.
Through Empower, TCS aims at building the capacity of its support staff. Modules for training include
acquiring basic computer skills, communication through English, and other relevant soft skills. In
FY16, over 1,200 beneficiaries received training
under the program.

TCS is also supporting the development of the
GAINS (Girls Advancing in STEM) Academy at
Avasara which was established in Pune in October
2014. Avasara aims at providing girls twenty-first
century skills such as exposure to coding and
critical writing, to promote holistic learning.
Encouraging girls education
at the Avasara Academy

G4-SO1

55

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

At the Manuski Hostel in Pune, TCS has supported the education of 40 children from socially and
economically disadvantaged communities. Water filters, computers, and a broadband connection
have also been provided in the girls' hostel. A library has been set up for the boys' hostel. In Noida,
TCS has associated with Vidya & Child to promote learning in Math, English, and other soft skills
among children. TCS provided financial support for 18 meritorious students in Class X, XI, XII. TCS has
also supported the working of 41 Gadadhar Abhyudaya Prakalpa (GAP) units promoting holistic
development of underprivileged children across the country.
Community Initiatives in North America
In North America, through the company's interventions more than
20,000 people have been impacted. goIT is TCS' signature community
engagement program in North America through which our employees
teach computer programming and mentor youth to increase STEM
education and career awareness. This year, the initiative reached 997
students of which 426 were girls. TCS also actively participated in the
Hour of Code, a coding competition conducted during the Computer
Science Education Week that saw participation from more than 1,300
students including 400 women.
We were a proud co-founding sponsor of the inaugural US2020 STEM
Mentoring Awards, held on July 23 at the White House. The award was
goIT session at
instituted to recognize mentors for their exceptional work in science,
Minneapolis
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) mentoring. The awards
ceremony was part of the first ever STEM Mentoring Symposium, bringing together leaders from the
Obama administration, public, private, and social sectors to share best practices, discuss common
challenges and reaffirm mentoring as a powerful tool for education reform and nation building.

Community initiatives in UK
In UK, TCS reached more than 34,000 people
through its interventions. IT Futures, our
flagship program, encourages students to
develop an interest in IT and strengthens the
ability of educators to deliver effective
training and relevant skills. This year, TCS
participated in the Big Bang Fair, a STEM fair,
organized to enhance children's interest in IT.
In the event, TCS volunteers created fun
technical challenges for the student
participants. The TCS Tech Challenge is
another novel program where university
teams produce detailed, real world solutions
in support of partner charities.

Students participating in IT Futures in UK

IT for Good challenges 14-18 year olds to come up with an IT system to help people overcome a real
world problem for the chance to win a week's MISSION YOU training placement with TCS in London,
Edinburgh, Peterborough, or Liverpool. With its Apps for Good partnership, TCS has teamed up with
the organization to challenge young people aged 11-14 to develop problem solving skills and
became tech entrepreneurs, who create apps to solve problems. Stepney Green Maths and
Computing College is the first institute we partnered with our IT Futures program, which aims at
inspiring young people at various stages in their education.

G4-SO1

56

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Other Global Initiatives
In Asia Pacific, Australia, and New Zealand, our programs impacted over 14,000 people. In Australia,
six not-for-profit organizations were selected to receive expert IT and technology support pro bono,
as part of a new community program. Our Go4ITWork Experience Program encourages an interest
in IT among women, and saw participation from
20 women from 47 different schools in Sydney
and Melbourne.

TCS associates volunteer at
IT awareness sessions in South Africa

In Middle East and Africa, our programs have
impacted over 2,000 people. TCS South Africa has
initiated several programs to bring about
IT awareness in schools and in underdeveloped
rural areas of South Africa. In South Africa, TCS has
trained more than 500 underprivileged children in
IT in a year. Through its graduate training program,
the company has trained and recruited 33 youth in
South Africa.

In LATAM, the programs reached over 3,000 people. ENABLE, a program focusing on the social and
economic empowerment of differently abled people, impacted 375 people. We also partnered with
Centro Paula Souza, to conduct technical lectures for 150 students. Centro Paula Souza is the largest
technical education institution in Latin America with 282 education units and 285,000 students. The
program is expected to train more than 1,000 students.
Promoting Health and Well Being
It is not only important to provide high quality education to all sections of the society, but also to
ensure that learning happens in a clean and healthy environment. The 'Swachh Bharat, Swachh
Vidyalaya Abhiyan' launched by the Government of India, intends to enhance cleanliness across
schools, through enhanced water and sanitation facilities. The program is focused on providing the
girl child the surety of safety, dignity, and equality. A special task force started executing this program
in March, 2015 and was completed in by July 31, 2015. TCS' intervention has benefitted 80,757 girls in
1,472 schools across 1,169 villages in four states. The Ministry of HRD and state authorities have noted
that the TCS model is an excellent approach towards sanitation, which can be adopted by other
corporates and PSUs.
Our model leverages our core competencies in technology to create sustainable solutions for several
organizations that are devoted to providing health services towards marginalized and affected
groups. TCS has chosen to work with cancer, cleft palate, and the general rural community health. For
example at AIIMS, TCS understood that the way forward was to change the current OPD process and
enhance patient experience by decreasing the time between the entry and exit processes. Post
comprehensive analysis, TCS decided on the following approach: Phase I (Short Term) would include
OPD Transformation and Performance and improvement of the existing IT systems. Phase - II (Long
Term) would include enterprise resource planning implementation and electronic medical record
stream. Post TCS' intervention, the patient reception center now has a seating capacity of 750 with 52
operational counters. There are 10 operational web kiosks with an increased capacity in the waiting
area. 85 patient care coordinators have been assigned and 34 departments have successfully
streamlined their processes to treat 1000 patients a day.
We also designed and implemented a comprehensive Hospital Management System for TMC, Kolkata.
TCS has been supporting the system and IT Infrastructure since 2011 and has added value through
constant on-demand enhancements and upgrades. In FY 16, compatibility for clinical and EMR
capacities was ensured and the endoscopy process has been enhanced by third party software
integration and re-organization of the order and payment process. Computer-on-Wheels has been
configured and introduced in wards to ensure immediate information and update. The new GE-PACS

G4-SO1

57

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

system integration with the HMS was carried out without impacting day-to-day operations in the
Radiology Lab. The donor fund management process has been linked with social assessment for
disbursal of funds to the low income patients. Employee leave and appraisal process has been
implemented for in-house staff. The IVR system and OS in digital networks has been upgraded. The
physical setup of key equipment has been changed for better air circulation and maintenance. In FY
16, more than 130,000 patient visits and treatment details were successfully logged.
A comprehensive and fully integrated, web-based solution was also provided pro bono to the Cancer
Research Institute at Chennai. In FY 16 as a result of laboratory equipment integration, the
advantage of HMS could achieve a bigger number of patients, delivering as much as 540,000
investigation results.
The company also utilizes its expertise in IT to assist social organizations by highlighting areas of
improvement and suggesting processes and systems to increase efficiency. TCS provides simple, user
friendly and holistic systems which assist in mapping core functions of the social program and
translating them into tools promoting transparency and visibility and accountability. Last year, we
successfully launched projects for Mumbai Mobile Creches, Operation Smile, Center for Social
Action, and Impact India.
TCS is attempting to deploy a practical model to improve education, healthcare, and environment
and promote economic empowerment in rural areas across India. To improve livelihood options in
Panvel, India, TCS associates have trained 50 women in making eco-friendly jute bags through the
Women Empowerment Program. More than 520 children in this area are benefiting through the
provision of a two-storey school building prepared with a science lab, a library, and a solar operated
computer lab. Infrastructure for clean drinking water is also built as supplementary support.
Volunteers visit the school every weekend to teach the kids conversational English, Science, and
Math. These activities come under the Panvel Rural Development program that is a flagship
volunteering initiative of TCS Maitree. More than 1,114 children and adults have benefitted from such
initiatives in Panvel (Maharashtra), Padmapur (Odisha), and Challera (UP).
In China, TCS employees supported Operation Smile by maintaining accurate medical records for all
the patients and provided support in the pre-op and post-op activities. 157 patients benefitted from
this program. TCS associated also developed SenCi, a Senior Citizen Mobile Application which
provides reminders for medicines and doctor's appointments. In Australia, HeartKids Australia, Cystic
Fibrosis New South Wales, Hunter Medical Research Institute, The Royal Hospital for Women
Foundation, The Australian Indigenous Leadership Centre, and The Penguin Foundation will be the
first beneficiaries of the TCS Australia and New Zealand Pro Bono Community Program.
Providing relief during occurrences of natural disaster
In FY 16, Chennai was hit by devastating floods that affected a significant proportion of the
population. Serving as the lead organization in the Tata Group's crisis response, TCS spearheaded
several initiatives to help disaster hit individuals recover from their losses and rebuild their lives. We
helped setting up community kitchens and health camps and assisted in the distribution of food and
emergency kits. More than 2,500 individuals received aid at the health and wellness camps set up by
TCS. In addition, TCS donated INR 10 crore to Tamil Nadu government's flood relief work and also
donated INR 13.8 crore to the Tata Group's efforts.
Environmental Stewardship
We have mapped the biodiversity at our office sites and have implemented various conservation and
enhancement programs to protect and enhance biodiversity. Currently, there are 305 types of flora
being nurtured within various TCS campuses.

G4-SO1

58

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

TCS in association with the Sahyadri Nisarga Mitra Chiplun has been implementing the Marine Turtle
Conservation Program since 2010. The program aims to protect the breeding sites of the Olive
Ridley Turtle and prevent illegal hunting and killing of turtles while protecting these species from
other predators. Till date, we have helped protect 150 nests of Olive Ridley turtles and successfully
translocated 16,202 eggs to hatcheries. 8,290 baby turtles were successfully released into their natural
habitat. The program has ensured a higher survival rate (51.17%) of the turtle hatching, thereby
contributing to an increase in the marine turtle population worldwide.
TCS has also provided support for the maintenance of the Chinnapanahalli Lake in Bengaluru. Over
8,000 TCS employees also drove maintenance activities for the garden surrounding the lake.
Volunteers helped rebuild the senior citizen's park, pruned hedge plants across the garden, built a
nursery, provided manure to the plants, and helped with the construction of an underground water
drainage system. Chinnapanahalli Lake is now an abode for bird species like the painted stork, spot
billed duck, egrets, bee eater, and the cormorant.
Restoring Heritage Sites
The Rajabai Clock Tower is located in
the Fort campus of the University of
Mumbai (India) and is a UNESCO World
heritage site. TCS has played a
significant role in restoring the 87m
tower. The architectural restoration of
the tower included structural services,
such as stoning, re-establishing
woodwork, water-proofing, and
electrical work, ensuring the longevity
of the building for future generations.
One of the biggest challenges was to
TCS helped restore the Rajabai Clock Tower
implement sensitive restoration and
repair work of the clock tower at a height of 87m (~29 floors). The restoration has helped renew the
building's glory.
Volunteering
We encourage volunteer-driven, meaningful activities for employees and their families. TCS Maitree
is a core human resources function within TCS and is based on the philosophy of Together, Caring
and Sharing.
TCS Purpose4life (P4L), a corporate volunteering initiative that motivates and enables our employees
to contribute towards societal well-being. It is designed to channelize our CSR efforts and leverage
the extensive geographic reach. Education, Health, and Environment are the main focus areas under
which initiatives are carried out. Interested associates pledge and commit to volunteer a minimum of
10 hours a year. P4L has been supported by an online and globally accessible platform and mobile
apps. In FY16, we crossed 600,000 hours of volunteering.
Our employees find this to be a satisfying way of giving back to the society and the best way of
continuing the Tata legacy. There are many dedicated volunteers who volunteer along with their
families so that the importance of social responsibility is cascaded to the coming generations as well.

G4-SO1

59

Our
Environment

Our Environment
TCS acknowledges the role it needs to play as a responsible corporate citizen and targets to decouple growth
and the impact on the environment through conscious changes in its strategy across the value chain. Aligned
to our continued commitment towards playing a leadership role in environmental protection and climate
change mitigation, we follow a sustainable approach while pursuing business aspiration and enhancement
of shareholder value.
Guided by our environmental policy, we continuously strive to reduce our ecological footprint and drive
efficiency through resource optimization and reduction of waste. Green IT, green buildings or sustainable
supply chain initiatives - the ultimate objective is to embed sustainability into daily operations and also help
our customers achieve sustainable growth through our green solutions and service offerings.
With a strong emphasis on energy efficiency, green infrastructure, and green IT, we continue to reduce our
energy and carbon footprint. We also focus on water efficiency and reducing the demand on fresh water
through wastewater treatment and closed loop recycling. Effectively managing waste as per the 3R principle
(reduce, reuse, and recycle), TCS aspires to attain the status of 'zero waste to landfill' across all its campuses.
Our supply chain sustainability drive aims to influence our supply chain partners to improve their
sustainability performance through continuous engagement and gradual capacity building. All this is
deployed through our Environment Management System framework in accordance with the international
standard ISO 14001:2004. Our key delivery centers at 114 locations across the globe have been certified to
this standard.

‘Beyond
compliance’ focus

Resource efficiency

Green building
infrastructure

Climate change
mitigation

Green IT
Green
procurement

Supply chain
focus

Exhibit 31: Environmental Management at TCS

62

Employee
engagement

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Focused commitment and persistent efforts towards its environmental sustainability roadmap has helped
TCS decouple business growth and the ecological footprint. The performance for FY 2015-16 is depicted in
Exhibit 32.
Objective

Target Date

Status

Carbon footprint* (per capita) reduction by 50% over baseline
2007-08*(Scope 1 + Scope 2)

2020

On track

1.65 (weighted average) PUE

2018

Target year
extended

20% renewable energy procurement

2020

On track

Water neutrality

2020

On track

Zero* solid waste disposal to landfill (*<5%)

2020

Target year
extended

Inclusion of vendor sustainability requirements in contract and
performance of assessments

2017

On track

Compliance

Exhibit 32: Summary of Environmental Performance

TCS complies with all applicable environmental regulations. There were no instances of fines imposed due to
non-compliance to environmental regulations or negative consequences due to TCS' operations in the
reporting period.
Energy Efficiency and GHG Mitigation
Commitment – To reduce the specific carbon footprint by 50% by 2020.
The changing global climate affects the planning and day-to-day operations of businesses, governments,
and other organizations. The manifestations of climate change include higher temperatures, altered rainfall
patterns, and more frequent or intense extreme weather events such as intense rainfall, heatwaves, drought,
and storms. Each year there are climatic events that present risks to people and organizations. As climate
change becomes more apparent, mitigation as
well as adaption are becoming critical for
45% reduction in
business sustainability. With an Environmental
1 specific electricity
consumption
Sustainability Roadmap, TCS has defined a
proactive energy and carbon management
43.6% reduction
plan. Our target is to reduce our carbon
in specific carbon
2
footprint
footprint by 50% by 2020 over the baseline
year 2007-08. The performance is summarized
in Exhibit 33.
3 10 LEED certified
campuses

The sources of greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions contributing to TCS' carbon
footprint (depicted in Exhibit 4)24 are:
n

Scope 1: Diesel operated generator sets,
company-owned vehicles, refrigerant gases
(fugitive emissions), cooking gas
combustion, fuel combustion for space
heating

3.1% of total
power from
renewable sources

4
5

Achieved PUE of
1.75 across 23 key
data centers

Exhibit 33: Energy and carbon performance

23 All performance measured over the baseline year 2007-08
24 Scope 1 and Scope 3 emissions have been calculated using the emissions factors published by the Green House Gas protocol. For Scope
2 emissions – i.e. purchased electricity related carbon emissions – for India, the source is the emissions factor in the CO2 Baseline
Database for the Indian Power Sector, User Guide, Version 11.0, April 2016 published by Central Electricity Authority of India. For Scope 2
emissions of locations other than India, emission factors published by DEFRA 2015 have been used.

G4-DMA (Compliance),
G4-DMA (Emissions),
G4-DMA (Energy), G4-EN29
63

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

2015-16

4,23,777

4,39,400

Tonnes of CO2 equivalent

3,78,214
3,00,555

58,961

58,961

34,263

31,924

Scope 1

Scope 2

Exhibit 34- Carbon Footprint (Scope 1 and Scope 2) Distribution
n

Scope 2: Purchased electricity

At TCS, the grid is the primary source of electricity, with diesel generator (DG) sets used for back-up power
supply during outages. Solar power through roof-top solar panels and 'green power' (hydroelectric or wind
power) purchased through third party providers are sources of renewable energy in some of the TCS
locations along with conventional power. Natural gas fuel is used in some overseas locations for space
heating. A source-wise breakup of the 592,323 MWh (2,312,683 GJ) of electricity consumed by TCS in FY 2016
is given in Exhibit 35. The total direct energy consumption by primary energy sources was 277,391 GJ (from
fuel consumption in owned vehicles, diesel consumption in diesel generators, combustion of cooking gas,
and space heating).

Electricity
from green
sources
3.14%

Electricity from
onsite fuel
combustion
4.55%

Electricity
from Grid
92.31%

Exhibit 35: Break-up of Electricity Consumption by Source (%)

G4-EN15, G4-EN16, G4-EN3

64

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Over 90% of TCS' Scope 1 + Scope 2 carbon footprint is attributable to indirect energy use. Energy in the form
of electricity, being the single largest contributor towards TCS' carbon footprint, is a key input to TCS'
business operations. As the business grows, the energy requirement also increases. TCS leverages state-ofthe-art energy efficient technologies, innovative thinking, and people engagement to find solutions that
meet business needs and simultaneously benefit the environment. To achieve its carbon target, TCS has
formulated a detailed plan of action on energy and carbon management, focusing on the following elements
(Exhibit 36):
n

Green buildings and office infrastructure

n

Green IT

n

Operational energy efficiency

n

Procurement of renewable energy

n

n

Energy eﬃciency
by design

Green
Buildings

Energy eﬃcient
equipment
n

Green procurement

n

Server virtualization

n

Server consolidation

n

Cooling optimization

Green IT

n

n

Operational
efficiency

Efficient
operations

Remote energy
monitoring and
control

Renewable
Energy

n

Onsite RE
installations, solar PV
& solar thermal

n

Procurement of RE
from third parties

Energy & Carbon Management

Exhibit 36: Enablers to Energy and Carbon Management

25 Being a services company, there is no direct material consumption in TCS' operations. Resources consumed -- including electricity, water,
physical infrastructure, and office information and communication technology equipment – are auxiliaries which support operations.

G4-DMA (Materials),
G4-EN1, G4-EN2, G4-EN7
65

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Green Buildings
TCS views green infrastructure as a key enabler for reducing the ecological footprint of office spaces and
achieving sustainable growth. All our owned campuses are designed according to LEED Green Building
standards for energy and resource efficiency, among other factors. TCS has 10 LEED certified campuses at:–
1. Siruseri Phase 1, Chennai – LEED Gold; Siruseri Phase 2, Chennai – LEED Platinum (Exhibit 7)
2. Sahyadri Park, Pune – LEED Gold
3. Banyan Park, Mumbai – LEED Gold
4. Peepul Park, Trivandrum – LEED Silver
5. Kalinga Park, Bhubaneswar – LEED Platinum
6. Barabati, Bhubaneswar – LEED Platinum
7. Synergy Park (Phase 2), Hyderabad – LEED Gold
8. Garima Park, Ahmedabad – LEED Gold
9. Gitanjali Park, Kolkata – LEED Gold
10. TCS Centre, Kochi – LEED Gold
The other upcoming facilities at Hyderabad, Trivandrum and Indore are also designed as per green buildings
standards and will be certified when completed. Some of the new office spaces which TCS has leased are also
LEED certified. Energy efficiency is a key criterion for new leases of office spaces.

Exhibit 37: The campus at TCS Siruseri, Chennai, which is LEED Platinum Certified
Some key features of our green buildings include energy efficient design of the building envelope, energy
efficient electrical and mechanical equipment, onsite renewable energy (rooftop solar photovoltaic panels),
solar thermal installations (hot water generators), chiller waste heat recovery units, and solar PV based
peripheral lighting systems.
Green IT
As a part of its Environmental Sustainability Roadmap, our internal IT team works on reducing the carbon
footprint in all its areas of operations through procurement of energy efficient IT infrastructure, operational
energy efficiency, eco-friendly disposal of end-of-life IT equipment through e-waste management, and other
such initiatives.

G4-DMA (Materials),
G4-EN7
66

FY 2015-16 saw effective integration of smart meters across our key data centers as part of TCS' Remote
Energy Monitoring and Control initiative. This has helped monitor data center power usage and Power Usage
Effectiveness (PUE) on an online platform and drive efficiency. Key steps taken to improve the efficiency of

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

data centers included optimal alignment of air supply grill tiles, arranging racks in hot and cold aisles,
plugging cold air leaks, providing cold aisle containment and optimization of cooling units by switching off
extra units. UPS optimization was also carried out; excess capacity was removed or replaced with matching
capacity in order to reduce the losses and improve the PUE. In addition, the temporarily unutilized space
within data centers was consolidated and partitioned to reduce cooling needs.
In FY 15-16, the average PUE of our 23 key data centers improved from an average of 2.2 to 1.75, with six data
centers having a PUE of 1.65 or less. Despite our strong focus and keen efforts on this metric, we fell short of
our target of 1.65 by March 2016. This was attributed to the legacy infrastructure across older locations which
required considerable revamping and modernization. Based on our experience so far and better estimates of
the work involved, we have extended the timeline to 2018. Towards that, we have planned several initiatives
including ODC virtualization to optimize IT infrastructure efficiency.
Efficient Operations
TCS Remote Energy Management and Control initiative helps monitor, report, manage and improve energy
usage for over 100 offices we occupy across India. The solution comprises hardware embedded assets, TCS
Data Acquisition and Management System, and TCS Connected Universe Platform, the company's cuttingedge cloud-based IoT platform, which facilitates data management, analytics, rich query capabilities, and
visualization.
TCS has also set up a centralized Resource Operations Center (ROC) at its campus in Kochi supported by
subject matter experts, energy analysts, and cloud-based IT systems experts, to enable real-time monitoring
of energy consumption and advanced energy analytics. This has helped identify real-time wastages in energy
use and yielded significant savings.
The ROC continuously monitors the underlying infrastructure to ensure consistently high levels of data
availability, data quality, and system uptime of infrastructure comprising more than 15,000 sensors and
associated servers and gateway devices. TCS Global Infrastructure Monitoring Solution helps quickly identify
the failure points in this multi-layered structure.
The ROC provides real-time alerts based on complex rules combining multiple data sources such as energy
consumption, occupancy, and weather. The platform also enables analytics that allow us to optimize key
loads, such as enhancing chiller operations for effective chiller scheduling and management.
The solution also provides real-time visualization of consumption, cost, and other key performance indicators
(KPIs) at the location, region, and enterprise levels. This allows us to measure the energy performance of sites
and aggregate KPIs for comparison by type of site, climatic zone, nature of operations, and so on. Poorly
performing sites are taken up for assessments and audits to identify opportunities for enhancing their energy
performance.
Renewable energy
Renewables are an important element of the global climate change adaptation strategy, improving the
resilience of existing energy systems and ensuring delivery of energy services in changing climatic
conditions. To meet its carbon target, TCS has also identified renewable energy as a substitute to high carbon
energy. Roof-top solar power plants have also been installed at our campuses. Some of our offices also have
small renewable energy installations including solar peripheral lights, solar electrical fencing systems, and
solar water heaters. TCS is looking at procurement of renewable energy through third party providers over
the next few years to achieve a target of 20% renewable component by 2020. In FY 2015-16, renewable
energy accounted for 3.1% of the total energy consumed.
TCS has successfully reduced its specific carbon and energy footprint, clearly demonstrating the decoupling
of business growth from carbon and energy footprint. TCS has also reduced its energy consumption by 5%
over FY 2015 and 45% over baseline year FY 2008 (as depicted in exhibit 38).

G4-DMA (Materials)
G4-EN6, G4-EN7
67

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Electricity consumption (kWh/FTE/month)
350

319
257

300

267

250

246

231

216

200

196

186

177

150
100
50
0

2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
Exhibit 38: Year-wise reduction in Electricity Consumption (kWh/FTE/month)

Our combined GHG emission (Scope 1 + Scope 2) was 1.69 tCO2e/FTE in FY 2016 as compared to 1.82
tCO2e/FTE in the last financial year; 43.6% less than the baseline year 2008 and 7% less than the last
reporting year (Exhibit 39).

Scope 1 + Scope 2 emissions (tCO2e/FTE/annum)
3.50
3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
1.50
0.00

3.00

2.71

2.44

2.35

2.12

1.99

1.97

1.82

1.69

2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
Exhibit 39: Year-wise reduction of Carbon Footprint (Scope 1 + Scope 2) in tCO2e/FTE/annum

Scope 3 includes other indirect carbon emissions, which are a consequence of company's activities but occur
from sources not owned or controlled by the Company. Often this typically contributes significantly to the
total carbon footprint for any organization.
The Scope 3 accounting standard by the GHG Protocol classifies emission sources into pre-defined
categories. The various categories of Scope 3 emission sources applicable to TCS, along with the approach
and reporting boundaries, are described in Exhibit 40.
Scope 3 Category

Accounting Approach

The carbon footprint from the
information and communication
technology equipment purchased, which
are not capitalized, is accounted under
Category 1 –
Purchased goods and purchased goods. The services which TCS
procures for infrastructure management
services
are delivered from within TCS premises
and hence are accounted for in Scope 1
and Scope 2 emissions.
G4-DMA (Emissions),
G4-EN18, G4-EN19,
G4-EN5, G4-EN6, G4-EN7
68

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Scope 3 Category

Accounting Approach

Category 2 – Capital
goods

Emissions from office machinery,
equipment, furniture, computer, servers,
and electrical machinery which are
capitalized are accounted for in this
category.

Category 3 – Fuel and
energy related
activities (not
included in Scope 1
and Scope 2)

The emissions associated with upstream
extraction, production, and
transportation and T&D losses due to the
electricity consumed in TCS offices are
quantified under this category.

Category 4 –
Upstream
transportation and
distribution

IT goods constitute a significant
proportion of the company's overall
purchase. The upstream transportation
and distribution emission for the IT
purchases have been quantified based on
the life cycle data published by key
suppliers to TCS for different IT assets like
desktops, laptops, and servers.

Category 5 – Waste
generated in
operations

Emissions associated with waste disposal
have been quantified taking into
consideration the recycled quantities,
waste treatment, and disposal methods.

Category 6 –
Business travel

Business air travel is very relevant and
material to TCS due to the nature of
business and our operating model. The
GHG emission from business air travel
(Scope 3) has reduced by 50% over
baseline year and is 0.40
tCO2e/FTE/annum. This reduction has
been possible due to our commitment to
optimize business air travel through strict
controls and by encouragement of audio
and video conferencing. The year-on-year
trend is given in Exhibit 12.

Category 7 –
Employee
Commuting

This has two components – travel in hired
vehicles provided by the company and
travel in personal or public transport. The
distance traveled is monitored for
company vehicles by type of vehicle and
fuel, and used to calculate the associated
emission. For employees commuting by
personal or public transport, the number
of employees using personal transport
(two-wheelers or cars) is collected from
the parking pass issue records, and it is
assumed that the rest use public
transport. It is assumed that on an
average, a person travels 30 km a day for
work, based on the average distance of
the offices in each city from the
geographical center. Emissions are
accounted for based on the kilometers
travelled and the emission factor for
passenger cars, motorbikes, buses, and
trains. This data is reported only for
India, representing over 90% of our
total employees.

Exhibit 40: Categories of Scope 3 Emissions

G4-DMA (Transport)

69

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

The proﬁle of the Scope 3 categories applicable to TCS is given in Exhibit 41.
Category 1– Purchased goods
& services ; 35,064 ; 5.25%
Category 7 – Employee
commuting ; 2,32,406 ;
34.79%

Category 2 – Capital goods ;
81,027 ; 12.13%

Category 3 Fuel and
energy related
activities(not included
in Scope 1 or 2) ;
1,79,811 ; 26.92%
Category 6 –
Business travel ;
1,35,097 ; 20.23%

Category 4 – Upstream transportation
and distribution ; 1,854 ; 0.28%
Category 5 – Waste generated
in operations ; 2,693 ; 0.40%

Exhibit 41: Scope 3 Carbon Footprint Distribution (Legend – Category type;
carbon footprint in tCO2e; % of total Scope 3)

Business air travel emissions (tCO2e/FTE/annum)
1.00

0.80
0.44

0.50
0.00

2007-08 2008-09

0.52

0.44

0.42

0.34

0.31

2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14

0.36

0.40

2014-15 2015-16

Exhibit 42 Year-wise comparison of Carbon Footprint (Scope 3-Business Air Travel) in tCO2e/FTE/annum

Cycle to work
scheme

100% of waste
diverted from
landﬁll

100% FSC and
recycled paper

Net Zero Carbon
Ofﬁce

G4-EN17, G4-EN30

70

TCS-Liverpool – First TCS Delivery Center certified as
‘net zero carbon’
In April 2015, TCS-Liverpool set a challenging objective to become ‘net
zero carbon’. The initiative called ‘Zeros Heroes’ is based on a 5 step plan
to reduce the energy demand, recycle 100% of waste, use energy from
renewable sources, offsets and employee engagement. Under this, we
actively encouraged employees to help in offsetting our emissions by
volunteering in local community for plantations, recycling days and
educational workshops.
As a outcome of our persistent efforts, we achieved the ‘net zero
carbon’ certificate by Alphacello, UK in January 2016, becoming the first
TCS Delivery Center to become net zero carbon.

26 Emission factors used are from DEFRA 2016 & DEFRA 2012 – GHG conversion factors, GHG Protocol All Sector Tools 2014, Lifecycle GHG
assessment study published by key suppliers of ICT equipment to TCS.

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Ozone Depleting Substances
Some of the refrigerants used in HVAC systems, such as R-22, have been recognized as Ozone Depleting
Substances (ODS). All the ozone depleting refrigerant gases as per the Montreal Protocol will be phased out
and replaced with zero Ozone Depleting Potential (ODP) refrigerants in line with the country-specific
timelines agreed as per the Montreal Protocol and country regulations. The new facilities coming up at TCS
have HVAC systems based on non-ODS refrigerants. ODS emissions are primarily in the form of system losses
or fugitive emissions during maintenance and repair. The ODP of the total refrigerant emissions to the
atmosphere in FY 2016 was 0.22 tonnes of CFC-11 equivalent.
Other Emissions
Diesel generator sets used as a source of power during power outages, emit Oxides of Sulphur (SOx) and
Oxides of Nitrogen (NOx) gaseous emissions, which are listed in Exhibit 43.
Emissions

Quantity (tonnes)

SOx

3.3

NOx

413
Exhibit 43: Other Emissions

Water Sustainability
“Clean, safe drinking water is scarce. Nearly 1 billion people in the developing world don't have access to
clean, safe drinking water. Yet, we take it for granted, we waste it, and we even pay too much to drink it from
little plastic bottles. Water is the foundation of life. And still today, all around the world, far too many people
spend their entire day searching for it.” – The Water Project, Inc.
Commitment – To achieve water neutrality by 2020
To achieve our ambitious goal of achieving water efficiency by 2020, we have ensured water efficient design
in new offices and campuses, as well as 100% treatment and recycling of sewage and rainwater harvesting.
Exhibit 44 summarizes the water performance.
Fresh water is critical for our operations, and it comes from several sources. The source-wise breakup of the
3.52 million kL of water consumed in FY 2016 is given in Exhibit 45.

Water efficiency
15% reduction in specific water consumption

Rainwater harvesting potential
478,626 cum of rainwater harvesting potential created

Water recycling
5.5 million kL of water recycled

Exhibit 44: Water performance
27 Source: The Water Project, Inc., Water Scarcity and the Importance of Water, accessed 18 July 2016,
https://thewaterproject.org/water-scarcity/
28 No natural water source is directly impacted due to water consumption by TCS. For offices where measurement systems are not available,
assumptions and rules of thumb are used to estimate the quantity of water consumed, recycled, and reused.

G4-DMA (Water),
G4-EN20, G4-EN21,
G4-EN8, G4-EN9
71

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Bottled 1%

Purchased
(Tanker)38%

Municipal 45%

Borewell16%
Exhibit 45: Fresh Water Consumption by Source in 2015-16

Water Efficiency
Rainwater
Harvesting

Awareness
Creation
Treatment

Recycling

Water Management

G4-EN8

72

Exhibit 46: Water Management Measures

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Consistent water efficiency measures (as indicated in Exhibit 46) have helped reduce the specific fresh water
consumption by 15% over baseline year FY 2008, and by 2% reduction over last year (as shown in Exhibit 47).

Fresh water consumption
(litres per FTE per month)
1,500
1,234

1,242

1,253
1,104

1,000

1,073

1,076

1,072

1,077

1,051

500
0

2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
Exhibit 47: Decrease in Per Capita Fresh Water Consumption

Several TCS offices have sewage treatment plants. The treated effluent from these plants is tested regularly
against applicable effluent disposal standards and recycled for use in HVAC cooling tower make-up, toilet
flushing and gardening. The recycled treated sewage has increased with the commissioning of new TCS
projects designed for zero water discharge (Exhibit 48).

Reused water (kL)
20.00,000
15,12,503

15.00,000

10,71,130

10.00,000

8,05,051

5,26,729 6,10,577

5.00,000 1,40,612 2,34,701 2,68,901 3,06,652
0
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
Exhibit 48: Increase in Recycled water (kL)
The percentage of the total treated sewage recycled of the total fresh water consumed has increased from
34% in FY 2015 to 44% in FY 2016. All upcoming TCS owned facilities have sewage treatment plants designed
for 100% treatment and further recycling of the treated effluent.
Rain water harvesting is an important feature of building design at TCS. We have implemented rooftop
collection systems, collection and storage tanks, recharging of bore wells, recharge trenches and pits, and in
some cases, water bodies for storing rain water.
There has been an 80% increase in the rainwater harvesting potential at TCS sites in FY 2016 over the
previous year (Exhibit 49). The current rainwater harvesting potential is 87% of the total groundwater used
across TCS facilities.

Rainwater Harvesting Potential
(in cubic meter)
6,00,000
5,00,000
4,00,000
3,00,000
2,00,000
1,00,000
0

4,78,626

54,745

59,358

2007-08 2008-09

87,602
2009-10

96,741

1,35,430 1,48,769

2010-11 2011-12 2012-13

2,17,396

2,66,458

2013-14 2014-15

Exhibit 49: Increase in Rainwater Harvesting Potential

2015-16
G4-EN10, G4-EN22, G4-EN26

29 No significant impact on biodiversity of water bodies or related habitats from discharged water and runoff

73

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Waste Management
Commitment – To achieve zero waste to landfill by 2017
Waste generation is steadily on the rise as a natural result of population increase and economic growth.
Waste management is becoming a critical issue, especially in urban areas, since the waste produced is, more
often than not, greater than the waste that can be disposed in an environment friendly manner. This has an
adverse impact on the environment and imposes public health risk and other socio-economic problems.
For an IT services and consulting organization like TCS, emissions and wastes are limited and from our office
operations. There are no process wastes or emissions. Municipal solid waste is the predominant type of solid
waste generated from TCS' operations. TCS also generates electronic and electrical waste (e-waste) and a
relatively smaller proportion of potentially hazardous wastes like lead-acid batteries and waste lube oil which
are regulated in many countries including India, where there are specific regulations governing their
handling and disposal.

100% e-waste is disposed of
through government
authorized recyclers

E-waste

100% hazardous waste is
disposed of through government
authorized recyclers

Hazardous
Waste

Biodegradable
waste

100% paper waste
is recycled

31% biodegradable is
waste recycled on-site

Paper
Waste

Exhibit 50 Waste management performance
Waste management has been identified as one of the key focus areas in TCS' Environmental Sustainability
Roadmap with the objective of becoming a 'zero waste to landfill' organization. We have extended the
timeline for this target from 2017 to 2020 since the vendor ecosystem capable of robustly handling and
recycling all waste streams is still evolving in India. However, for wet waste, we have 100% handling and
treatment facilities at all owned campuses.

G4-DMA (Effluents and Waste)

74

30 <5% waste to landfill. The target year earlier was 2017 but it has been revised to 2020 as we are working on setting up recycling practices,
especially in leased offices where there is limited space and dependency on the landlord

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

TCS' waste management practices (see Exhibit 50) seek to reduce the environmental impact of waste streams
as far as possible by reduction in generation, segregation at source, reuse and recycle where possible, and
proper management to achieve the ultimate goal (long-term target) of disposing less than 5% waste to
landfill. This has inspired actions to deliver results by raising greater awareness and in turn motivating more
action towards sustainable waste management. The waste management performance is summarized in
Exhibit 50.

Sent for recycling

Sent to scrap
dealers or
municipal disposal

Paper
waste
Mixed
dry waste

Hazardous
& e-waste

Disposed through
government
authorized recyclers
in compliance with
local regulations

3R
Generation of
biogas/ composting
or sent to piggeries
as feed

Printer
& toner
cartridges

Food
waste
Garden
waste

Sent back to the
manufacturer

Vermi-composting

Waste Management
Exhibit 51: Waste Management Methods
Environmentally Sustainable Biodegradable Waste management
Our approach to reducing waste generation starts with reduction at the source, through rigorous
associate awareness campaigns and training cafeteria staff to minimize the biodegradable waste generated
(Exhibit 52). The waste management strategies are centered on either recycling the waste for further use
(where possible) or arranging for safe disposal (paper waste – 127 tonnes, Dry waste – 1740 tonnes, canteen|
waste – 2867 tonnes). The increase in FY 16 is because the quantity of dry waste has increased due to better
accounting and increased reporting.
Display board for awareness

‘Project Smiley’- for Food Waste Management
at TCS Bangalore
Project Smiley was taken up at TCS Bangalore, with the
objective of reducing food wastage and diverting waste
from landﬁlls through onsite recycling. The key success
factor for the project was increased employee
participation.
Employees are encouraged to reduce food waste by:
n

Adopting self-service

n

Building awareness through display boards saying
“Take all you can eat, but eat all you take”

Any food waste generated is converted to manure
through an onsite composter. Around 500 kg of food
waste was processed during the period of November
2014 to Mar 2016, and 162 kg organic manure was
generated. After the success of this project, it has
been replicated across various TCS locations.

G4-EN23
Kitchen composter converts food waste to manure

75

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Waste generated
(Kg per FTE per year)
25
19.9

20

16.9
14

15
10

18.2

17.9

17.7
15

14.7

8

5
0
2007-08
08

2008-09
09

2009-10
10

2010-11
11

2011-12
12

2012-13
13

2013-14
14

2014-15
15

2015-16
16

Exhibit 52 Year-wise Waste Generated (Kg/FTE/yr)
The hierarchy for disposal of biodegradable waste is biogas recovery through bio-digesters (methane
avoidance) followed by composting, disposal as feed to piggeries and, as the last resort, to the municipal
waste collection system. The technology selected depends upon the space availability and the estimated
food waste generation. In FY 2016, 31% of the total wet waste generated was treated through onsite
composting or bio-digester treatment. A total of 127 tonnes of compost was generated from garden waste in
FY 2016. This is an excellent bio-fertilizer that maintains vegetation health, and also helps us avoid the use of
chemical fertilizers and the resultant soil and groundwater pollution.

Campus Food Waste turns into Campus Energy
The first waste-to-energy project has been adopted at TCS Siruseri in Chennai. Key highlights:
n

Food waste is treated on-site to
produce electricity (used to run
ventilation fans in the basement)

n

At full capacity, the digester will
process and divert 960 tons of
food, and generate 57,600 kWh of
electricity annually

n

A trial run from July 2015 to March
2016 resulted in the generation of
1003 kWh electricity from 129 tons
of food waste

n

A view of Bio-digester (Waste to Energy)
at TCS Siruseri, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

Besides methane avoidance, the organic fertilizer produced helps to maintain the landscape

31 Data given is only for India geography since most overseas locations are multi-occupancy facilities where waste handling and disposal
are handled by the building authority and hence not under TCS' control

76

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Paper management initiative
Paper management at TCS is based on the waste management hierarchy with waste reduction at the
pinnacle. The effectiveness of this approach is demonstrated by the success of our paper consumption
reduction initiative due to whichthe per capita paper consumption has reduced by 79.5% over the baseline
(Exhibit 53).

Paper consumption
(Reams/1000 FTE/month)
250
200
150
100
50
0

231
133
87

2007-08

2008-09

2009-10

72

65

55

51

50

2010-11

2011-12

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

47

2015-16

Exhibit 53 Reduction in Paper consumption (Reams/1000 FTE/month)
Much of this reduction can be attributed to creating awareness among employees and enforcing printing
discipline through automated as well as manual administrative means. The paper waste is carefully
segregated, shredded, and sent for recycling. In some cases, they are sent to NGOs which supply stationery
items (such as notepads and files) made from recycled paper back to us. In FY 2016, TCS continued to achieve
100% recycling of the total paper waste.

TCS Germany Goes Green
After becoming the first TCS delivery center to switch to 100% green electricity, the TCS
Dusseldorf office continues to demonstrate its commitment towards protecting the
environment through its shift to sustainable paper. The office uses 100% recycled paper and
has inspired other offices in Germany.
The paper procured is certified by:
n

EU-Ecolabel, which is recognized across Europe for promoting environmental excellence

n

FSC certification, which ensures that products are made from well managed forests that
provide environmental, social, and economic benefits

E-waste Management
The e-waste generated our offices includes computers, monitors, servers, and other electronic and electrical
items. Our E-waste Management Policy complies with the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment
(WEEE) directive, Government of India's E-waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2011 and other country
level regulations.
To ensure that electronic waste is recycled properly, our e-waste dismantling/recycling service providers
undergo a stringent due-diligence audit process to ensure compliance with Health, Safety, and Environment
related regulations. A desktop review is followed by a detailed site audit to verify adherence to HSE practices
at site, thereby extending 'duty of care' to the supply chain.

32 This data given is only for India, since most overseas locations are multi-occupancy facilities where waste handling and disposal is
handled by the building authority

77

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

In FY 2016, 21,140 computers were disposed of through government authorized handlers or recyclers, in
accordance with the regulations of each country. In addition, computers which were in working condition
but deemed obsolete for TCS' purposes were donated to educational and charitable institutions. Recipients
of such donations are required to return the hardware to TCS once it reaches the end-of-life or arrange for
proper disposal through government authorized e-waste vendors.
Hazardous Waste Management
For India operations, hazardous wastes (as defined by regulations) are handled and disposed of as per the
Hazardous Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2008, only through government authorized vendors.
Refer Exhibit 54 for the quantities disposed. We conduct compliance and site audits before registering
hazardous waste vendors as a part of our supply chain sustainability drive. Similarly, we follow local
regulations in other regions. However, since we have fewer facilities outside of India which are mostly leased
and operated by building owners, the generation of such waste is marginal and is appropriately handled
through the building operators.
Type of Waste

Amount

Lube oil from DG sets

24,069 liters

Number of used batteries from UPS systems

9,187

Exhibit 54: Disposal of Hazardous Waste in India
Further, all used printer cartridges and photocopier toner bottles are sent back to the manufacturers under
to ensure proper disposal.
Environmental expenditure
At TCS, environmental initiatives are seen as part of overall operational and infrastructure improvement, and
the expenditure is not tracked separately. Green building projects are included in the capital expenditure
while expenditures like monitoring and measurement costs, small energy efficiency projects, and compliance
fees are included as a part of the operational budget for the facility.
Employee Engagement
Employee engagement is a key part of TCS' Environmental Sustainability Roadmap. To sensitize employees
towards nature and the need for conserving resources, we leverage various awareness models such as
classroom training of new employees (induction training), continuous learning, awareness emails, as well as
site activities like competitions and other campaigns. The total training hours on health, safety, and
environment in the year were over 670,000.
In FY16, TCS observed the Tata Sustainability Month in June. We also observed World Earth Day, World Biodiversity Day, Green Consumer Day, Pollution Control Day, Energy Conservation Day, World Water Day, and
Earth Hour. Each event saw enthusiastic participation from employees.

G4-DMA (Overall)
G4-EN24, G4-EN25,
G4-EN31
78

33 Data for all geographies.
34 There were no reported spills of hazardous wastes in FY 2016. Zero percent of the wastes are shipped internationally and none are
deemed hazardous under the terms of the Basel Convention Annex I, II, III, and VIII.

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

Tata sustainability month 2015

‘Best out of
Waste’ Contest

As part of the Tata Group’s commitment
towards society and the environment, TCS
celebrated a month-long environmental
sustainability campaign in June 2015. The

Photography
Contest

underlining theme of the campaign was
SMART: Sustainable and Meaningful Actions
for a Responsible Tata way. It was observed
through the weekly themes Carbon and

Green Products
Exhibition

Energy, Water, Waste, and Biodiversity.
Activities that were conducted included
inauguration of various green initiatives,

Distribution of
Organic Manure

informative lectures by experts, tree
plantation drives, exhibitions, ﬂoor walks,
movie screenings, and competitions for
employees and contract staff. Contests
included a Rangoli competition, a ‘best out of

Distribution of
Saplings and
Seeds

waste’ contest, and a photography
competition. The campaign was a success
and saw participation from over 110,00
employees from across the globe.

Distribution of
Saplings and
Seeds

Supply Chain Sustainability
We define "critical" as something that would affect our business continuity. Therefore, TCS recognizes the
criticality of human capital to business and its sustainability. Non availability of suitably skilled talent may
pose a risk to TCS. Ability of the Company to attract and retain talent is critical. This critical risk is mitigated by
attracting and retaining talent through the following processes:
a)

Identification of competency and skill gaps on a continuous basis and aligning with market needs

b)

Strong process for lateral hiring across the globe

c)

Process for identification of career aspiration of professionals and helping them reach their goals

d)

Making TCS a 'caring organization' by offering opportunities for good health, involvement with
communities and self- development

e)

Focus on career aspiration planning for high performers and incentivize them with learning, growth and
leadership opportunities

In FY16, TCS remained the highest recruiter in the industry in India with a gross addition of 90,182
employees. TCS continues to remain the employer of choice at engineering campuses in India.
In addition, we procure various pieces of equipment and software that make up the Company's IT
infrastructure, largely sourced from the local offices of leading global technology providers. With reference to
procurement IT infrastructure & other goods & services, the Company purchases goods/services for its
operational sustainability and business processes. No particular goods/Services is termed as being more
79

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

critical than the other. TCS doesn't identify and manage individual suppliers' transactions but looks at the
categories to which they belong. Within each category, TCS seeks three suppliers at least, who could meet
the Company's business needs. Further asset categories (in Hardware: Desktops & Laptop, Servers & Storage,
Peripherals, Network Equipment, Spares & Services) have been identified with their applicable vendors to
help service our needs better. Office supplies and consumables are all locally sourced by individual operating
units in the different regions where we operate.
All of the Company's suppliers must sign the Supply Code of Conduct which not only mandates ethical
dealings with the Company but also promoted ethical practices throughout the supply chain.
Supply Chain Health, Safety and Environment management.
Commitment – To include vendor sustainability requirements in contracts and conduct assessments

As part of its Environmental Sustainability Roadmap and commitment to Tata group's philosophy, TCS seeks
to instill environmental, social, and governance (ESG) practices in its upstream supply chain. We also engage
with and support downstream supply chain partners in their respective endeavors on sustainability.
In line with TCS' commitment to sustainability, TCS' key suppliers and supply chain partners are expected to
instill socially and environmentally responsible practices in their businesses. Engagement and capacity
building are the pillars of the sustainable supply chain program at TCS.
Sustainability is a key criterion for selecting vendors and maintaining ongoing relationships with them (see
Exhibit 55). With compliance to legal requirements set as the minimum requirement, some additional
highlights of TCS' supply chain sustainability program include:
n

Mandatory sign-off on TCS' Supplier Code of Conduct and Contractor HSE requirements by all vendors

n

Assessments and audits for high-risk vendors

n

Integration of sustainability metrics in vendor reviews

n

Training and capacity building

Sustainable Supply Chain Engagement Model

2

1
Evaluate the
vendor/product portfolio
Map the active
vendor/product portfolio

6

Assessment
Conduct assessments,
whether desktop
reviews or site audits,
based on the vendor risk
level and engagement

Prioritize

3

Vendor
assessment
and
audits
Assess
risks

5

Engage
Based on the risk level
assigned in Step 4,
define the vendor
engagement plan across
all stages from release of
tender till on-boarding

Evaluate the current
product/vendor portfolio

Vendor
engagement
at the time
of contract

Prioritize
Based on the volume of
business and applicability of legal
requirements, conduct a preliminary
prioritization to identify the major
purchases/ vendors.

Evaluate the
overall vendor
risk level and
Impact type

Conduct risk assessment
Assess environmental, social,
and safety risks for each vendor
and product category

Assign overall risk level and
Impact Type
Prioritize based on the overall risk
level assigned to the vendor as an
outcome to step 3; also ascertain
whether impact on TCS is direct
or indirect

4

Exhibit 55: Sustainable Supply Chain Engagement Model

G4-12

80

This program currently covers a significant proportion of our supply chain partners by expenditure. Desktop
assessments have been conducted for some vendors where the impact on TCS is indirect, including ICT
suppliers. Site or process audits have been conducted for high-risk vendors with direct impact on TCS, such
as hazardous and e-waste recyclers, as well as cafeteria, facility management, drinking (bottled) water
suppliers and transport service providers.

GRI G4 Content Index
2016

*Please see GRI Application Level Service organizational mark on page 73

GENERAL STANDARD DISCLOSURES
General
Standard
Disclosures

Page Number (or Link)

External Assurance

STRATEGY AND ANALYSIS
G4-1

CEO's message - page 5

Pages 86 - 90

ORGANIZATIONAL PROFILE
G4-3

Organizational profile - page 10

Pages 86 - 90

G4-4

Organizational profile - page 10

Pages 86 - 90

G4-5

Contacts - page 92

Pages 92

G4-6

Global footprint - page 11

Pages 86 - 90

G4-7

Organizational profile - page 10

Pages 86 - 90

G4-8

Global footprint - pages 11,12

Pages 86 - 90

G4-9

TCS by numbers - page 13

Pages 86 - 90

G4-10

Our Workforce - page 39

Pages 86 - 90

G4-11

Our Workforce - page 39

Pages 86 - 90

G4-12

Supply Chain Sustainability - page 79-80

Pages 86 - 90

G4-13

Organizational Profile - page 10, Global Footprint - page 11

Pages 86 - 90

G4-14

Our Environment - page 62, 63

Pages 86 - 90

G4-15

Our Sustainability Strategy and Corporate Governance - pages 24

Pages 86 - 90

G4-16

Our Stakeholders - page 16

Pages 86 - 90

IDENTIFIED MATERIAL ASPECTS AND BOUNDARIES
G4-17

About the Report - page 4

Pages 86 - 90

G4-18

About the Report - page 4,
Stakeholder Engagement and Materiality Definition - page 16

Pages 86 - 90

G4-19

Material Topics - page 18

Pages 86 - 90

G4-20

Material Topics - page 18

Pages 86 - 90

G4-21

Material Topics - page 18

Pages 86 - 90

G4-22

About the Report - page 4

Pages 86 - 90

G4-23

About the Report - page 4

Pages 86 - 90

STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
G4-24

Our Stakeholders - page 16

Pages 86 - 90

G4-25

Our Stakeholders - page 16

Pages 86 - 90

G4-26

Our Stakeholders - page 16

Pages 86 - 90

G4-27

Our Stakeholders - pages 16, 17

Pages 86 - 90
81

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

REPORT PROFILE
G4-28

About the Report - page 4

Pages 86 - 90

G4-29

About the Report - page 4

Pages 86 - 90

G4-30

About the Report - page 4

Pages 86 - 90

G4-31

Contacts - page 92

Pages 92

G4-32

About the Report - page 4

Pages 86 - 90

G4-33

About the Report - page 4, Assurance Statement - pages 86-89

Pages 86 - 90

G4-34

Corporate Governance - page 24

Pages 86 - 90

G4-36

Corporate Governance - page 24

Pages 86 - 90

GOVERNANCE

ETHICS AND INTEGRITY
G4-56

Ethics and Compliance - page 28,
Serving as an Ethical Exemplar - page 30

Pages 86 - 90

G4-57

Ethics and Compliance - page 28,
Serving as an Ethical Exemplar - page 30

Pages 86 - 90

SPECIFIC STANDARD DISCLOSURES
DMA and
Indicators

Page Number (or Link)

Identified
Omission(s)

Reason(s) for Explanation
Omission(s) for
Omission(s)

External Assurance

CATEGORY: ECONOMIC
MATERIAL ASPECT: ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE
G4-DMA

TCS by numbers - page 13

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EC1

TCS by numbers - page 13,
Competitive Compensation
Model - page 46

Pages 86 - 90

MATERIAL ASPECT: MARKET PRESENCE
G4-DMA

Our workforce - page 39

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EC5

Competitive Compensation
Model - page 46

Pages 86 - 90
CATEGORY: ENVIRONMENTAL

MATERIAL ASPECT: MATERIALS
G4-DMA

Energy Efficiency and GHG
Mitigation - pages 65 - 67

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN1

Energy Efficiency and GHG
Mitigation - page 65

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN2

Page 65

Pages 86 - 90

MATERIAL ASPECT: ENERGY

82

G4-DMA

Energy Efficiency and GHG
Mitigation - page 63

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN3

Energy Efficiency and GHG
Mitigation - page 64

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN5

Energy consumption
- page 68

Pages 86 - 90

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

MATERIAL ASPECT: ENERGY
G4-EN6

Energy Efficiency and GHG
Mitigation - pages 67 - 68

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN7

Energy Efficiency and GHG
Mitigation - pages 65-68

Pages 86 - 90

MATERIAL ASPECT: WATER
G4-DMA

Water Sustainability page 71

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN8

Water Sustainability
- pages 71 - 72

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN9

Water Sustainability
- page 71

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN10

Water Sustainability
- page 73

Pages 86 - 90

MATERIAL ASPECT: EMISSIONS
G4-DMA

Energy Efficiency and GHG
Mitigation - pages 63, 68

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN15

Energy Efficiency and GHG
Mitigation - page 64

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN16

Energy Efficiency and GHG
Mitigation - page 64

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN17

Energy Efficiency and GHG
Mitigation - page 70

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN18

Energy Efficiency and GHG
Mitigation - page 68

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN19

Energy Efficiency and GHG
Mitigation - page 68

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN20

Energy Efficiency and GHG
Mitigation - page 71

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN21

Energy Efficiency and GHG
Mitigation - page 71

Pages 86 - 90

MATERIAL ASPECT: EFFLUENTS AND WASTE
G4-DMA

Waste Management
- page 74

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN22

Sewage treatment
- page 73

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN23

Waste Management
- page 75

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN24

Hazardous Waste
Management - page 78

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN25

Hazardous Waste
Management - page 78

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN26

Water bodies - page 73

Pages 86 - 90

83

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

MATERIAL ASPECT: PRODUCTS AND SERVICES
G4-DMA

Sustainability in Marketing
- page 32

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN27

Sustainability in Marketing
- page 32

Pages 86 - 90

Not
applicable

G4-EN28

TCS is an IT
services
company and
hence does
Pages 86 - 90
not have any
packaging
material

MATERIAL ASPECT: COMPLIANCE
G4-DMA

Our Environment - page 63

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN29

Our Environment - page 63

Pages 86 - 90

MATERIAL ASPECT: TRANSPORT
G4-DMA

GHG emissions
- page 69

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN30

GHG emissions
- page 70

Pages 86 - 90

MATERIAL ASPECT: OVERALL
G4-DMA

Our Environment
- page 78

Pages 86 - 90

G4-EN31

Environmental expenditure
- page 78

Pages 86 - 90
CATEGORY: SOCIAL

SUB-CATEGORY: LABOR PRACTICES AND DECENT WORK
MATERIAL ASPECT: EMPLOYMENT
G4-DMA

Our workforce - page 39

Pages 86 - 90

G4-LA1

Talent Retention page 40, 41, 45

Pages 86 - 90

G4-LA2

Competitive Compensation
Model - pages 46 - 47

Pages 86 - 90

G4-LA3

Talent Retention - page 45

Pages 86 - 90

MATERIAL ASPECT: LABOR/MANAGEMENT RELATIONS
G4-DMA

Our workforce - page 39

Pages 86 - 90

G4-LA4

Our workforce - page 39

Pages 86 - 90

MATERIAL ASPECT: OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY

84

G4-DMA

Occupational Health and
Safety - page 48

Pages 86 - 90

G4-LA5

Occupational Health and
Safety - page 48

Pages 86 - 90

G4-LA6

Injury Statistics - 50

Pages 86 - 90

G4-LA8

Occupational Health and
Safety - page 48

Pages 86 - 90

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

MATERIAL ASPECT: TRAINING AND EDUCATION
G4-DMA

Talent Development
- page 44

Pages 86 - 90

G4-LA9

Talent Development
- page 44

Pages 86 - 90

G4-LA11

Career Development
- page 46

Pages 86 - 90

MATERIAL ASPECT: EQUAL REMUNERATION FOR WOMEN AND MEN
G4-DMA

Competitive Compensation
Model - page 46

Pages 86 - 90

G4-LA13

Competitive Compensation
Model - page 46

Pages 86 - 90

SUB-CATEGORY: SOCIETY
MATERIAL ASPECT: LOCAL COMMUNITIES
G4-DMA

Our Community - page 52

Pages 86 - 90

G4-SO1

Our Community - page 52

Pages 86 - 90

85

External Assurance

G4-33

86

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

G4-33

87

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

G4-33

88

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

G4-33

89

Corporate Sustainability Report 2015 | 2016

G4-33

89

CONTACT
Corporate Headquarters
TCS House
Raveline Street
Fort Mumbai 400 001
Maharashtra
India
Phone 6778 9999 Fax 6778 9000 www.tcs.com
Please email any feedback/queries to corporate.sustainability@tcs.com

About Tata Consultancy Services (TCS)
Tata Consultancy Services is an IT services, consulting and business solutions organization that
delivers real results to global business, ensuring a level of certainty no other firm can match.
TCS offers a consulting-led, integrated portfolio of IT and IT-enabled infrastructure, engineering
and assurance services. This is delivered through its unique Global Network Delivery ModelTM,
recognized as the benchmark of excellence in software development. A part of the Tata Group,
India’s largest industrial conglomerate, TCS has a global footprint and is listed on the National
Stock Exchange and Bombay Stock Exchange in India.
For more information, visit us at www.tcs.com

IT Services
Business Solutions
Consulting
All content / information present here is the exclusive property of Tata Consultancy Services Limited (TCS). The content / information contained here is
correct at the time of publishing. No material from here may be copied, modified, reproduced, republished, uploaded, transmitted, posted or distributed in
any form without prior written permission from TCS. Unauthorized use of the content / information appearing here may violate copyright, trademark and
other applicable laws, and could result in criminal or civil penalties.

G4-5, G4-31

TCS Design Services I M I 09 I 16

Copyright © 2016 Tata Consultancy Services Limited

